(722) Division Business Analyst — Journeyman
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5216171007
2026-08-19T12:03:44-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Journeyman Division Business Analyst supports Division leadership and cross-functional teams by performing business analysis, requirements documentation, workflow management, cost-benefit analysis, and process improvement activities. The Analyst helps convert technical and operational requirements into actionable business information and ensures Division taskers and workflow activities are effectively managed. Clearance: Active TS Office Location: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Gather and document business, functional, and technical requirements. Analyze workflows, products, and processes and identify opportunities for improvement. Perform cost-benefit and other business analyses supporting R&D investment and resource decisions. Develop data and supporting materials for leadership decision-making. Coordinate meetings and events related to Division investment and prioritization activities. Operate and maintain the assigned Division Workflow Application. Receive, disseminate, track, and close internal and external taskers. Coordinate OPR/OCR assignments and monitor suspense dates. Maintain business records, reports, trackers, and other analytical products. Collaborate with scientists, engineers, business personnel, and leadership to resolve requirements and workflow issues. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Active Top Secret Clearance 3-7 years' Experience Experience in business analysis, program support, operations analysis, or related work. Ability to perform requirements and process analysis using established methodologies. Strong organizational and analytical skills. Effective written and oral communication. Ability to manage multiple tasks simultaneously and work collaboratively in a Government or military environment AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 