(513) Influence, Deception, and Perception Management Activities Staff Officer SME IV
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/4660812007
2026-09-11T20:42:41-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Overview The Influence, Deception, and Perception Management Activities Staff Officer SME Level IV will work as a contractor to support the Office of the Under Secretary of War for Intelligence and Security (OUSW(I&S)) Sensitive Activities & Special Programs (SASP). Work Location: Pentagon, Arlington, VA Clearance: TS/SCI Job Responsibilities and/or Success Factors Strategy Development: Develop and promulgate strategies and plans for DoW influence, deception, and perception management-related operations, activities, and investments. Oversight and Governance: Assist leadership in the conduct of oversight and governance, including staff assistance visits and compliance inspections, for DoW influence, deception, and perception management-related operations, activities, and investments. Policy Coordination: Develop and coordinate staff packages that include time-sensitive requirements for leadership to enable DoW influence, deception, and perception management-related operations, activities, and investments. Reporting and Briefing: Produce and disseminate reports and briefings that detail DoW influence, deception, and perception management-related operations, activities, and investments for Congress and Senior Executive Branch officials. Collaboration and Integration: Collaborate with various stakeholders to ensure alignment and integration of influence, deception, and perception management strategies within broader DoW and Intelligence Community objectives. Education and Minimum Qualifications Must be a US Citizen with an active TS/SCI Clearance. Bachelor’s Degree Minimum of 10 years of experience with policy development or policy analysis work within the Department of War. Relevant fields could include assessments, operational requirements and risk, or operational planning. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 