(717) Acquisition Program Analyst - Journeyman
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5215711007
2026-08-19T11:35:17-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Acquisition Program Analyst provides acquisition, procurement, business operations, and financial analysis support to AFRL Sensors Directorate organizations. The position supports acquisition planning and execution, purchasing activities, market research, procurement documentation, financial analysis, and continuous process improvement. The Analyst works with Government stakeholders and vendors to help translate organizational requirements into compliant and executable acquisition solutions. Clearance: Active TS Office Location: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Support acquisition and procurement activities for products, services, organizational IT systems, and other Directorate requirements. Analyze business and purchasing processes and recommend improvements that increase efficiency and effectiveness. Gather and analyze acquisition and purchasing data and assist in developing standardized business rules and enterprise solutions. Conduct cost analysis, financial planning, budgeting, and acquisition-order coordination. Perform market research and prepare, analyze, and review procurement documentation and reports. Support requests for quotations based on Government requirements and coordinate with vendors to clarify requirements. Evaluate vendor offers and acquisition vehicles to support identification of advantageous solutions for the Government. Track acquisition actions, payments, discrepancies, shipments, logistics, funding, and related transactions. Support Government Purchase Card operations and maintain awareness of AFRL business operations programs, resource allocation processes, and acquisition strategies. Assist with procurement documentation supporting sole-source justifications, limited-source justifications, and small-business coordination. Build effective working relationships with acquisition, financial, logistics, technical, and program stakeholders. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Active Top Secret Clearance Mid-level (3-7 years) Working knowledge of DoD/Air Force acquisition, procurement, purchasing, or business operations. Ability to perform analytical and evaluative reviews of acquisition and business processes. Experience with market research, procurement documentation, cost analysis, and acquisition coordination. Strong analytical, organizational, written, and verbal communication skills. Ability to independently execute assigned acquisition actions while escalating complex policy or strategy issues appropriately. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 