(735) Counterintelligence Analyst
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5226804007
2026-08-31T18:05:46-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Counterintelligence Analyst will support the NOAA Research Security Program by conducting specialized analyses to identify, assess, and mitigate threats to NOAA's critical technologies, intellectual property, and research data. This position requires a strong background in counterintelligence methodologies with specific experience in research security, technology protection, and foreign influence detection. Location: (Hybrid) Silver Spring, MD Clearance: TS/SCI Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Threat Assessment and Analysis Conduct comprehensive assessments of foreign influence risks in NOAA research programs Analyze intelligence reports and open-source information to identify potential threats to NOAA-sponsored research Perform due diligence research on foreign entities seeking collaboration with NOAA research programs. Support development of the NOAA Critical Assets List by identifying critical technologies vulnerable to foreign acquisition Policy and Procedure Development Assist in developing specialized due diligence processes for both classified (JWICS) and unclassified research security reviews Contribute to the export control policy development and technology control plan assessments Draft standard operating procedures for counterintelligence-focused due diligence in research collaborations Support development of disclosure requirements standards and consequences for violations Security Framework Implementation Provide counterintelligence expertise for gap analysis of current NOAA research security posture Contribute to risk assessments of critical and emerging technologies as defined by NSPM-33 Develop procedures for identifying and mitigating nation-state threats to NOAA research Assist in designing supply chain risk management processes to protect research integrity Training and Incident Response Develop specialized training materials focusing on foreign influence detection, technology protection, and threat awareness Support tabletop exercises and simulations specific to counterintelligence scenarios Contribute to incident response planning for cases of suspected foreign influence or unauthorized technology transfer Provide briefings to NOAA personnel on counterintelligence trends and threat indicators Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Bachelor's degree in Intelligence Studies, International Relations, Cybersecurity, or related field Minimum 5 years of experience in counterintelligence, preferably in a government or research environment. In-depth knowledge of NSPM-33 requirements and research security frameworks Experience with export control regulations (ITAR, EAR) and technology control procedures. Proficiency with classified and unclassified intelligence analysis tools and methodologies. Strong analytical skills and ability to synthesize information from multiple sources. Excellent written and verbal communication skills. Security Requirement: Active Top Secret Clearance (SSBI/Tier 5) required prior to start. Must comply with DoD/NISPOM regulations and NOAA security requirements. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 