(733) Operations Manager Support Level II
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5226271007
2026-08-31T11:59:37-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Operations Management Support serves as the lead Program Security Officer (PSO) and Subject Matter Expert (SME) for special security and Special Access Program (SAP) support. This critical role ensures the seamless daily management, physical security, and administrative compliance of a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) and/or Special Access Program Facility (SAPF). The successful candidate will advise leadership on safeguarding SAP, SCI, and collateral data, manage access databases, coordinate interagency communications, and monitor task workflows to support tests, training, and defense operations. Work Location: Pentagon, Arlington, VA Clearance: TS/SCI Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Ensure strict adherence to the publications listed in Part 6 of this PWS. Identify and mitigate security incidents along with developing compliant and innovative response measures for Government leadership. Serve as the lead Program Security Officer (PSO) and subject matter expert for special security and special access program support in a SCIF and/or special access program facility (SAPF). Monitor access to SCIF/SAPF, and compliance with physical and administrative security requirements for the SCIF/SAPF to mitigate and ensure security violations. Coordinate with the OUSW(I&S) Special Access Program Central Office, Special Security Office, Joint Staff, and Military Services security offices for current guidance, direction, and resolution of security related issues and requirements. Coordinate personnel clearance verifications, visit request requirements, and provide security briefings for visitors and meetings in a timely manner. Initiate and coordinate requested Program Access Requests (PARS) and provide access briefings when PARs are approved. (Weekly). Ensure existing PARS are still required through continuous monitoring protocols. Facilitate Alternate Compensatory Control Measure (ACCM) accesses. Update and accurately maintain classified access management systems of record (e.g., Scattered Castles, Joint Access Database Environment, Defense Information System for Security). Coordinate facility, equipment, communications, and information technology needs specific to SCIF/SAPF requirements, including preparation for and assistance during required security inspections with multiple stakeholders. Assist and advise in the developing and executing approved policies and procedures for safeguarding Special Access Program (SAP), Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI), and collateral data in support of DoW and federal interagency operations. Identify and report critical, threats, and risks to tests, training and operational activities. Review, monitor, and report the status of action items, activities, and products using the CATMS and JSAP Systems. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Must be a US Citizen with an active TS/SCI Clearance. Minimum of 5 years of experience in operations management, preferably within a defense or intelligence environment. Experience in managing security operations and special access programs. Bachelor's degree in a relevant field is preferred. Strong organizational, communication, and leadership skills. Ability to work independently and collaboratively in a high-stakes environment. Proficiency in managing classified information and understanding of security protocols. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 