(719) Directorate Management Liaison — Journeyman
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5215744007
2026-08-19T11:35:48-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Journeyman Directorate Management Liaison provides day-to-day coordination, workflow, administrative, communications, calendar, and protocol support for AFRL/RF Directorate activities. Working within established Directorate processes, the Liaison coordinates across organizational units and helps ensure leadership taskers, engagements, visits, communications, and recurring activities are completed accurately and on schedule. Clearance: Active TS Office Location: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Coordinate information and activities among Directorate organizational units. Maintain and update Directorate and corporate calendars. Support Directorate bulletins, leadership communications, organizational charts, and mission briefings. Coordinate logistics and administrative requirements for leadership meetings and visits. Develop draft itineraries and coordinate visit requirements with protocol and participating organizations. Track Division-level deliverables associated with visits and leadership engagements. Prepare meeting materials, presentations, agendas, correspondence, documentation, and scripts. Receive, disseminate, track, and close internal and external taskers using the RF Workflow Application. Coordinate OPR/OCR information and maintain tasker status. Monitor designated organizational or executive inboxes and ensure time-sensitive communications are routed appropriately. Support domestic and international visit and tour planning. Maintain accurate records and provide timely status updates to leadership. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Active Top Secret Clearance 3-7 years' Experience Experience in administrative operations, executive support, workflow management, protocol, or organizational coordination. Familiarity with Government or military organizational environments. Strong organizational, written, and verbal communication skills. Ability to manage multiple simultaneous assignments and deadlines Ability to work collaboratively in a high-tempo environment with limited day-to-day supervision. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 