(734) Classification/Program Protection Security SME
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5226317007
2026-09-02T20:04:39-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: We are seeking a Classification/Program Protection Security SME. This position serves as a senior Security Policy Analyst and Action Officer responsible for formulating, staffing, and reconciling national and Department of War (DoW) security governance. The successful candidate will support the development and implementation of national and DoW policy, guidance, and training on Classification Management and Program Protection approximately three times per year, while facilitating and overseeing the conduct of critical security reviews and assessing and recommending security classification guidance and Program Protection Plans roughly twice annually. Additionally, the incumbent will establish robust relationships and collaborate routinely with key stakeholders including Research and Engineering (R&E), Acquisition and Sustainment (A&S), the DoW Chief Information Officer (CIO), the Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA), the Joint Staff (J28), and other federal entities to ensure the comprehensive integration of DoW program protection, Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM), counterintelligence (CI), and information security policies across all organizational efforts. Location: Onsite - Arlington, VA (Pentagon) Clearance: Active TS/SCI Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Support the development and implementation of national and DoW policy, guidance, and training on Classification management and Program Protection, approximately three times per year. Facilitate and oversee the conduct of security reviews, assess and recommend security classification guidance and Program Protection Plans, approximately two times per year. Establish relationships and collaborate routinely with R&E and A&S, DoW Chief Information Officer (CIO), Defense Counterintelligence & Security Agency, Joint Staff (J28), and other federal entities to ensure integration of DoW program protection, Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM), CI and information security policies. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Active TS/SCI Clearance Bachelor's degree Ten (10) years of demonstrated knowledge of national and DoW and information security policies and procedures. Five (5) years of experience working national level information security related issues affecting DoW and non-DoW entities. Five (5) years of experience developing policy, to include drafting, formatting, tracking, staffing, reviewing and reconciling inputs to DoW Directive(s), Instruction(s), Manual(s) and other publications; and reviewing other policy documents for information security equities. Three (3) years of experience in of developing, updating, and coordinating policy and developing action memos, congressional responses, briefings, background research, oversight visits, and participate in inter and intra agency meetings. Four (4) years of security policy or operational experience and experience as a staff action officer on an OSW, JCS, or Military Department headquarters staff. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 