(728) Logistics and Equipment Management — Journeyman
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5218232007
2026-08-21T00:30:14-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Journeyman Logistics and Equipment Management specialist provides hands-on logistics, equipment accountability, maintenance, calibration, tool-control, hazardous-material, and laboratory support for AFRL/RF research, development, test, and demonstration activities. The position helps ensure laboratories, equipment, and supporting systems remain mission-ready and compliant with applicable Air Force and AFRL logistics requirements. Clearance: Active TS Office Location: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Support accountable equipment and laboratory logistics programs. Track equipment inventories and assist Government equipment sub-custodians. Support PMEL/TMDE management, calibration, repair, and maintenance activities. Perform Composite Tool Kit custodian and tool-control duties. Maintain CTKs, equipment records, calibration documentation, and maintenance records. Perform preventive maintenance inspections and servicing in accordance with applicable technical data. Support electrostatic discharge equipment testing and ESD procedures. Track hazardous materials and chemicals and support associated ordering requirements. Support accountable and non-accountable equipment inventories. Support ordering and tracking of software and IT equipment. Coordinate facility maintenance/support tickets. Support laboratory, field, flight-test, and operational technology-demonstration activities. Document equipment inventory and test-equipment maintenance. Support equipment storage, disposition, FOD inspections, lock-out/tag-out requirements, and workspace inspections. Apply applicable Air Force, AFRL/RF, and base logistics procedures. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Active Top Secret Clearance 3-7 years' Experience Experience in military/DoD logistics, equipment management, maintenance, calibration, laboratory operations, or a related field. Working knowledge of accountable equipment procedures, PMEL/TMDE, tool control, and equipment inventory. Familiarity with safety, hazardous-material, ESD, FOD, and preventive-maintenance requirements. Ability to maintain accurate equipment and maintenance documentation. Ability to support both laboratory and field/test environments. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 