(729) Logistics and Equipment Management — Senior
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5218233007
2026-08-21T00:37:16-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Senior Logistics and Equipment Management specialis t leads and performs complex logistics, equipment-accountability, laboratory readiness, system-integration, maintenance, calibration, and test-support activities supporting AFRL/RF sensor research programs. The position provides senior technical/logistics expertise to ensure Directorate equipment, laboratories, test systems, and associated support equipment remain compliant, operational, properly documented, and ready for R&D and test activities. Clearance: Active TS Office Location: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Lead or oversee logistics and equipment-management activities supporting R&D laboratories, sensor systems, technology demonstrations, and test programs. Develop and implement equipment tracking and laboratory-readiness processes. Oversee accountable equipment, PMEL/TMDE, CTK/tool control, calibration, ESD, hazardous-material, and logistics support-stock activities. Ensure compliance with applicable DoD, Air Force, AFRL/RF, and base logistics requirements. Support rapid system integration and technology insertion for R&D programs. Provide logistics support for sensor systems, computer systems, data-collection hardware, test equipment, and associated support equipment. Support laboratory, field, flight-test, and operational technology demonstrations. Develop and deliver engineering/logistics support data supporting sensor-program activities. Oversee equipment inventory, maintenance, storage, disposition, calibration, and preventive-maintenance documentation. Coordinate on-site and off-site maintenance/support using internal resources, subcontractors, and vendors as appropriate. Support facility maintenance, upgrades, and modifications. Maintain inspection readiness and ensure compliance with AFRL/RF logistics policies. Oversee FOD inspections, ESD procedures, lock-out/tag-out areas, workspace inspections, equipment records, and related compliance activities. Provide senior-level problem solving and coordination for complex logistics, equipment, laboratory, and test-support issues. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Active Top Secret Clearance 7-10 years' Experience Advanced DoD/Air Force logistics and equipment-management experience, preferably supporting R&D, laboratory, engineering, or test organizations. Extensive knowledge of accountable equipment, PMEL/TMDE, CTKs, calibration, preventive maintenance, tool control, and equipment-account procedures. Demonstrated ability to manage logistics compliance and inspection-readiness activities. Experience supporting system integration, technology demonstrations, laboratory tests, field tests, or flight tests. Ability to lead complex logistics activities, resolve compliance or readiness issues, and provide technical guidance to other personnel. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 