(727) Infrastructure Design Support — Senior
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5218230007
2026-08-21T00:23:16-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: The Senior Infrastructure Design Support specialist provides facility planning, design, space-management, procurement, installation, and facilities-integration support to the Sensors Directorate. The position leads facility design studies and coordinates office and laboratory modification projects from requirements definition through design, cost/schedule development, procurement, installation, documentation, and customer approval. Clearance: Active TS Office Location: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Perform facility design studies and gather customer requirements. Develop design alternatives, initial drawings, final drawings, floor plans, room layouts, and interior selections. Address electrical, mechanical, utility, and other infrastructure requirements affecting interior and exterior environments. Develop bills of material and coordinate material procurement. Serve as an integration liaison among project managers, end users, contracting support, Civil Engineering, and other stakeholders. Maintain a centralized library of completed building modifications, including schedules, photographs, costs, plans, product information, and supporting documentation. Perform pre-design drafting using CAD applications such as MicroStation V8. Maintain facility drawings and Facilities Management Software information. Manage design, procurement, and installation of new and renovated office/laboratory spaces and furniture. Develop cost and schedule estimates and coordinate customer approval. Perform space allocation and interior finish selections. Coordinate requirements with 88 ABW Civil Engineering. Perform Real Property Building Manager duties when required, including protection of Directorate real property. Manage facility key inventories and telephone-system requirements. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Active Top Secret Clearance 7-10 years' Experience Advanced experience in facilities planning, architectural/interior design, infrastructure design, space management, or related facility support. Strong CAD capability and experience maintaining master facility drawings. Experience managing office/laboratory renovation or modification projects. Ability to develop cost/schedule estimates and coordinate multiple facility stakeholders. Strong project management, customer-interface, documentation, and organizational skills. AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 