(737) Deputy Director, Program Management
https://job-boards.greenhouse.io/arlosolutionsllc/jobs/5241604007
2026-09-17T18:36:36-04:00

 Company Summary Arlo Solutions (Arlo) is an information technology consulting services company that specializes in delivering technology solutions. Our reputation reflects the high quality of the talented Arlo Solutions team and the consultants working in partnership with our customers. Our mission is to understand and meet the needs of both our customers and consultants by delivering quality, value-added solutions. Our solutions are designed and managed to not only reduce costs, but to improve business processes, accelerate response time, improve services to end-users, and give our customers a competitive edge, now and into the future. Position Description: Arlo is in search of a Deputy Director to help lead the Programs Department on strategic and operational efforts across the full lifecycle of contract management and enable growth of the department. They would support strategic goals and lead operational execution of those goals. The Deputy Director would scope out proposed contracts, serve as a Transition Program Manager on new contracts, and serve as interim Program Manager when there are vacancies. Work Location: Remote (Candidates local to the Washington, DC area to participate in customer meetings and meetings at headquarters preferred) Responsibilities and/or Success Factors: Strategically and operationally support goals of the Programs Department, including leading the development of materials that enable sustainability and scalability of the Programs Department. This may include developing technical solution frameworks, policies, and procedures and other materials to be used by Program Managers. Liaise with business development teams on scoping for proposals and new contracts, including advising on technical solutions and staffing models, pricing, feasibility, risks and mitigation strategies. Note, the Deputy Director’s role in business development is a supporting role and is not expected to write proposals or sell work, but rather enable higher win rates and more successful and profitable delivery. Team with the Finance department to build out an estimate at completion (EAC) process to improve budgeting, forecasting, and monitoring of contracts. Serve as a backup for the Director of Program management to represent the Programs department on various working sessions and briefings for initiatives across other headquarters departments that impact Programs. Serve as Transition Program Manager for new contracts including scoping the work, leading the technical kick off, hiring contract staff, and developing program management deliverables and tools for the first 60-90+ days into successful transition into the sustainment phase. Serve as interim program manager contracts when there are program manager vacancies until permanent program managers are hired and also potentially serve as a program manager on contracts for longer term. Liaise with customers, Arlo headquarters departments (e.g. finance, contracts, HR, Recruitment, Security), and teaming partners. Build effective relationships with government personnel including the COR and government event leads. Solve complex, tactical assignments to ensure client satisfaction. Create the applicable project management deliverables necessary to manage and oversee the terms of the contract and manage the team. Manage contract risks, develop processes and monitor to ensure high quality. Design and execute administrative processes, including but not limited to detailed tracking of deliverables and milestones. Facilitate materials for bi-weekly status meetings with Program Managers and gather information from Program Managers for headquarters reporting as needed. Serve as backup to conduct 30- and 60-day check-ins with new staff. Manage and develop deliverables on indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity (IDIQ) and government-wide acquisition (GWA) contracts. Other special projects and duties as assigned. Minimum Qualifications Including Certificates: Bachelor’s degree • 10-15+ years of applicable professional experience including 5+ years of program management experience Federal government contract program management experience Strategic thinking skills and experience developing frameworks, policies, and procedures Experience leading teams in dynamic, fast-paced, and sometimes ambiguous environments Excellent attention to detail Critical Problem solving, contingency planning skills Client service and service delivery excellence skills Ability to influence key stakeholders and clients Background in Risk Management, Quality Management, and quality control Desired Qualifications: DoD experience • IT program management experience AAP Statement We are proud to be an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer and as such, we evaluate qualified candidates in full consideration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, national origin, age, disability status, protected veteran status, and any other protected status. 