                  Stenographic Transcript
                        Before the

     Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities

                    COMMITTEE ON
                   ARMED SERVICES

        UNITED STATES SENATE

TO RECEIVE TESTIMONY ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ALL-
       DOMAIN ANOMALY RESOLUTION OFFICE

               Tuesday, November 19, 2024

                     Washington, D.C.

            ALDERSON COURT REPORTING
              1029 VERMONT AVE, NW
                     10TH FLOOR
               WASHINGTON, DC 20005
                    (202) 289-2260
               www.aldersonreporting.com

TO RECEIVE TESTIMONY ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ALL-DOMAIN

ANOMALY RESOLUTION OFFICE

Tuesday, November 19, 2024

U.S. Senate

Committee on Armed Services

Subcommittee on Emerging

Threats and Capabilities

Washington, D.C.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 4:30 p.m. in

Room SD-G50, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Kirsten

Gillibrand, chairman of the subcommittee, presiding.

Committee Members Present:       Senators Gillibrand,

Peters, and Ernst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. KRISTEN GILLIBRAND, U.S.

SENATOR FROM NEW YORK

Senator Gillibrand:   This hearing will come to order.

I would like to first thank our witness, Dr. Jon Kosloski,

for testifying.   He is our newly appointed Director of the

All-domain Anomaly Resolution Office, or AARO, an office

Congress established in the fiscal year 2022 NDAA, to

investigate the very serious problem of unidentified

anomalous phenomenon, or UAP.

Dr. Kosloski comes to AARO from the Research

Directorate of the National Security Agency, where he worked

in areas of optics research and crypto mathematics.          He

previously served at the DoD Special Communications

Enterprise Office.   We look forward to regular engagements

between you and the Committee.

When unidentified anomalous phenomenon enters our

airspace we need to know about it.          We need to identify it,

but in order to do that we need to reduce the stigma and

credibility challenges associated with these events.          Our

servicemembers, scientists, foreign partners, and the

general public need to know that their reporting, research,

and analysis will be taken seriously and acted on in good

faith.

In the spirit of transparency, AARO recently released a

consolidated annual report, just a few months after

releasing the first volume of a historical record report in

March of this year.   These public documents help highlight

the challenges still facing this office, including the lack

of timely and actionable sensor data, the need to revisit

cases placed in the active archive, and the importance of

improving reporting sources, both in the interagency and

internationally.

In this hearing I want to probe a series of specific

issues.   First, as incidents at Langley and elsewhere have

demonstrated, unmanned aerial systems, or UAS, continue to

pose significant threats to our national security.    In

addition to safety of flight issues these UAS create for our

own pilots and air crew, the UAS present clear and

undeniable counterintelligence concerns around some of the

most sensitive airspace.   While standard UAS are not part of

AARO's mission, your work on sensors at military

installations across the country will be critical to making

sure that we have the domain awareness necessary to

accurately identify and track these objects.   I expect your

office to also pay close attention to any anomalous

characteristics that these systems could present in the

future.

Second, I look forward to your presentation of three

case studies demonstrating cases that AARO has resolved,

including the GOFAST, which is one of the most prominent UAP

cases.   However, I believe it is important to acknowledge

ongoing public interest in the Nimitz incident, the GIMBAL

video, and other prominent UAP cases, and for AARO to share

what it can about those cases, as well.

It is also important that AARO speak to unresolved

cases and what types of anomalous activity have merited

further analysis.   And while I know AARO has gone through a

period of transition over the past year, it is important to

share these disclosures, both resolved and unresolved cases,

with the public, even when a Senate hearing is not

scheduled.

Lastly, while some have been hesitant to come forward

to AARO in the past, I hope that potential individuals with

firsthand knowledge of unreported programs view your arrival

in this position as an opportunity for a new start.    AARO

was created by Congress to do this work.    Congress waives

nondisclosure agreements for those who disclose information

to AARO, and gave AARO the authority to go and turn over

every rock.   I hope those with information to share use this

opportunity so that we, as your Senators who represent you,

can do our job.

I look forward to hearing more on these issues from Dr.

Kosloski, and for members to start a dialogue on this

important topic.

With that I would like to turn to Senator Ernst for her

opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JONI ERNST, U.S. SENATOR

FROM IOWA

Senator Ernst:    Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you,

Dr. Kosloski.    Our hearing today is about identifying UAPs

and understanding their potential implications, which could

range from technological advancements to potential threats

to our national security.     Are these phenomena tied to

foreign adversaries such as China or Russia, leveraging

advanced technologies beyond our current capabilities, or do

they represent unknown scientific phenomena that challenge

our current understanding?

We must answer these critical questions to ensure that

our national security is not compromised.     It is vital that

all agencies work in tandem to aggregate data, identify

patterns, and develop robust analytical frameworks.     Our

ability to detect, track, and respond to UAPs requires the

latest technology and full cooperation from all government

branches.

Thanks very much, Dr. Kosloski, for your attention to

this matter, and I look forward to the valuable insights

that you and AARO can provide to our Committee.     And I yield

back.   Thank you.

Senator Gillibrand:   Dr. Kosloski, please make your

opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JON T. KOSLOSKI, Ph.D., DIRECTOR, ALL-

DOMAIN ANOMALY RESOLUTION OFFICE

Dr. Kosloski:     Thank you, Chairwoman Gillibrand,

Ranking Member Ernst, and distinguished members of the

Subcommittee.    It is a pleasure to be here on behalf of the

Department of Defense as the new Director of the All-domain

Anomaly Resolution Office.     I appreciate the opportunity to

provide a status update on AARO's work and respond to your

questions about unidentified anomalous phenomena, or UAP.

On behalf of the Department and the entire AARO team, I

want to say how grateful we are to Congress for its

continued support.    Unidentified objects in any domain pose

potential threats to U.S. safety and security.       Reports of

UAP activity, particularly near national security sites,

must be treated seriously and investigated with scientific

rigor by the U.S. government.

By way of introduction, I am Jon Kosloski.        I am a

researcher at my core, with an academic background in

mathematics, physics, and engineering.       I have spent most of

my career at the National Security Agency leading advanced

research in the areas of optics, computing, and crypto

mathematics.    By nature, I am drawn to tough scientific

problems, which is what brought me to AARO and the UAP

mission.

Since I arrived at AARO in August, I have been

impressed by the breadth and depth of my team's experience

and the framework they have established to rigorously

analyze UAP reports.   AARO has taken meaningful steps to

improve data collection and retention, bolster sensor

development, effectively triage UAP reports, and reduce the

stigma of reporting UAP events.       Last year, AARO worked with

DoD's Joint Staff to issue guidance to defense personnel

worldwide on how to report UAP observations, and is working

with the military services regarding implementation.       AARO

has also launched a public website that features UAP

imagery, case resolutions, material analysis, archival

records, and more.   These are only a few examples of AARO's

recent progress, and we are just getting started.

To date, AARO has over 1,600 UAP reports in its

holdings from across the U.S. government.       I will share a

slide in just a few minutes with updated UAP analytic

trends.   You will see that many reports resolve to

commonplace objects like birds, balloons, and unmanned

systems, while others lack sufficient data for comprehensive

analysis.   Although only a very small percentage of reports

received by AARO are potentially anomalous, these are the

cases that require significant time, resources, and a

focused scientific inquiry by AARO and its network of

partners.   It is important to underscore that, to date, AARO

has not discovered any verifiable evidence of

extraterrestrial beings, activity, or technology.

To accomplish AARO's national security mission, I have

set three priorities for the office:         building strong

partnerships, promoting transparency, and scaling up the

work of the office.

AARO cannot do its work alone.          Building partnerships

across government, academia, industry, and with the public

is essential to the success of the office.         Strong

cooperation with the military services is particularly

important.   We rely on their support to implement our

reporting guidance and to amplify the message that there

should be zero stigma associated with UAP reporting.

We also rely on partnerships with the National Labs,

the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, FBI,

Department of Homeland Security, and NASA, all of which play

a role in the whole-of-government effort to address UAP.

Recognizing the talent and expertise that reside

outside of government, AARO will continue to explore new

ways to partner with the academic and scientific communities

to investigate its most complex UAP cases.

A related priority for AARO is transparency.            Our

ability to collaborate with key partners, including the

scientific community and the public, relies on information

sharing, to include downgrading and declassifying UAP-

related information.   In some cases, it may be unclear to

the public why the DoD classified a piece of information in

the first place.   Why are photos of seemingly benign objects

such as balloons classified?       It is often the case that an

object or phenomenon itself is not a security concern, but

the location, source, or method used to capture it is still

sensitive.   Many cases are difficult to quickly release to

the public but are reported to the appropriate committees in

Congress that are authorized by the law or House and Senate

leadership to receive the information.

It is important to note that AARO does not unilaterally

declassify information.     Instead, we work with the

originator of a classified record to ensure that

declassifying that record does not inadvertently harm

national security.   This can take time.      Nonetheless, the

Department is committed to declassifying and publicly

sharing more information on UAP, while protecting sensitive

sources and methods.   I will be sharing some newly

declassified imagery in just a few minutes.

AARO is also working closely with the National Archives

and Records Administration to make UAP-related documents

publicly available in a digitized collection.       Meanwhile,

AARO continues to review the U.S. historical record relating

to UAP.   We welcome any former or current government

civilian, contractor, or military servicemember with

relevant information to reach out to us at www.aaro.mil.

My final priority is scaling up AARO's work to match

its mission.    AARO needs to bolster the quantity, quality,

and diversity of data that it acquires and examines.           This

means tapping into existing data sources within the

interagency while deploying AARO's own organic sensor

capabilities.    To the extent that UAP result from domain

awareness gaps, more and better data will help us fill those

gaps and help us understand what is being encountered.

In closing, AARO is committed to the highest standards

of scientific integrity.    We will not foreclose on any

explanation for UAP prematurely.         We will continue to follow

the science and data wherever they lead.           We will continue

to have an open and frank dialogue with Congress in settings

like these and in classified briefings.           We will continue to

keep you fully and currently informed of all UAP

information, active or historical.           And finally, we will

share as much information as possible at the unclassified

level to inform the public of AARO's activities and its

findings.

For now I would like to turn to a brief presentation of

UAP trends and cases, and then I would be happy to take

questions.

This chart represents the UAP reporting since 1996, and

as has previously been discussed by AARO, sensor placement

seems to have caused a bias in our data, both geographic and

at altitude.   And we are working to resolve that bias in

2025, or reduce that bias, through broader engagements with

the DoD as well as the IC and the rest of the government,

also by incorporating broader sensors into our data and

through a public reporting mechanism that we hope to have

live in mid 2025.

On the left side it shows the altitudes, and we will

see -- it is a bit cut off -- we will see that most of the

reporting occurs between 15,000 and 25,000 feet.       That

happens to be where most of our sensors are.       And the

reporting above and below that is also often coming from

those same platforms.

In the center we will see that the resolved cases have

the vast majority being balloons and UAS.       We are seeing a

great increase in satellites recently, particularly with the

launch of mega satellite constellations such as Starlink,

where the satellites are catching what is called satellite

flares or glint off the sun, just after sunset or just

before sunrise.

And on the right-most we will see the morphology or the

shapes that have been reported.       The majority have been

lights or orbs.   We think that there is going to be an

increase in the lights with the mega constellations.         But

our most interesting cases, some of which I will discuss

later, our actually the E-shape such as the triangles or the

cylinders.

And at the bottom we will see the geographic bias that

I mentioned before, where most of the reports historically

have been near the government sites.           This bias has been

reduced recently by reporting from the FAA.           We now get

weekly reports from them.     And a great thank-you to our

aviators for making those reports.           It helps our analysis

quite a bit.

Okay.    A case that we thought would be a transmedium

case as it was reported, is well-known on the outside, known

as the Puerto Rico case.    It was data collected in 2013,

when a Customs and Border Patrol aircraft observed an object

flying near an airport in Puerto Rico.           The green line in

this diagram is the track that the airplane was taking, and

those many crossed lines are the directions that the camera

was facing at the time that the airplane was flying around

the airport.    And we will watch the video in just a moment.

The orange arrow in the center is where we assessed

that the UAP was actually flying, and transmedium means that

it goes from one domain into another.           In this case, it

looks like it goes from the air into the water and then back

into the air.    We assessed that it was actually flying over

the airport the entire time.

And this video was taken with infrared, and what

appears to be the transmedium part, where it goes into the

water, is actually where the temperature of the water is

equal to the temperature of the object, and the camera can

no longer distinguish between the two.        It is not that the

object actually goes into the water.        So we assessed that

the object, likely a pair of balloons or sky lanterns, was

floating at about 7 knots over the airport and descending to

about 200 meters.   And this video will be released, and our

report will be released later this year.

The GOFAST captured the public attention and

congressional attention when it was made public in 2017.          It

looks like an object flying very fast over the water, very

close to the water.   Through a very careful geospatial

intelligence analysis, using trigonometry, we assessed with

high confidence that the object is not actually close to the

water but is rather closer to 13,000 feet.        The diagram here

shows as the platform is flying and capturing the object, if

it is closer to the platform at higher altitude a trick of

the eye called parallax makes it look like the object is

moving much faster.   And so we have written a detailed paper

on parallax, released on our website, so that the public can

literally check our math on this analysis.

An interesting case, which I do not believe the public

is familiar with, is captured in 2018 from a UAV flying in

the Mediterranean, watching Mt. Etna as it was erupting.

And it appears that that object is flying through the plume

of superheated gas and ash.

This was a rather difficult case to resolve.           We had to

pull in support from a number of IC and S&T partners, and

even reach out to a volcanologist.          And through very

detailed 3D modeling and pixel-by-pixel analysis of the

object as it is traversing across the clouds, they assessed

that the object was actually 170 meters away from the plume

and not flying through it.

And to be clear, AARO does not believe every object is

a bird, a balloon, or a UAV.     We do have some very anomalous

objects.   It is just the nature of resolution.         We can only

resolve things that we understand.          So we are now working on

additional products where we can inform the public,

Congress, and others of the objects as we are studying them,

rather than once we have resolved them.

With that I will take your questions.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Kosloski follows:]

Senator Gillibrand:   Thank you, Dr. Kosloski.       I

appreciate your testimony.

It has been widely reported that individuals claiming

firsthand knowledge of unreported UAP programs have been

reluctant to engage with AARO.       What message do you have for

those individuals, and how will you work to gain their

trust?

Dr. Kosloski:   I would let them know that Congress has

gone out of its way to create the organization AARO

specifically to conduct these sorts of investigations and

has uniquely empowered them to have access to all UAP-

related information, whether that is historic or current.

And we take that responsibility and those authorities very

seriously.

So we have been reaching out to a broader community,

encouraging folks who had talked to AARO personnel in the

past and maybe felt uncomfortable, to come back to us.         We

have met with several of their interlocuters and a couple of

firsthand witnesses, and we are making great progress in

those firsthand witnesses that we have talked to do feel

comfortable coming back to us.       And so we hope that more

folks that do have information would go to www.aaro.mil,

fill out the form, send it to us so we can bring them in for

interviews, and add their information to our investigations.

Senator Gillibrand:   Thank you.       I recently just read

your report from March, your historic report, and I would

encourage anyone who is interested in this topic to read the

report.   Because when I was asked by a reporter about it

they said, "Well, it doesn't show any evidence of secret

programs that have aliens."

That is not how I read the report.     What I read in the

report is the U.S. government took sightings extremely

seriously over the last 75 years, put some of the greatest

mind ever to analyze these cases, because they assessed them

as some deeply unknown phenomena that may or may not cause

threats, that may or may not be related to adversaries, but

are certainly something that the U.S. government needed to

know about.

And what I read from this report is that we resolved

numbers of cases, but in almost every instance, whether it

was in the '40s, the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, the

'90s, the '00s, half the cases were unresolved.     So I do not

think this is an example of the government not taking these

cases seriously.   I think this is an example of our

government spending 75 years taking these cases very

seriously.

And interestingly, for the group that put together this

report, they did not have access to any firsthand reporting.

And so from my perspective, for whistleblowers and people

who want to come in, please come in, because the purpose of

AARO is so that the Senators can do our job to provide

oversight, accountability, and transparency.            We find it

very concerning that our pilots, that our Navy officers,

that people who have sightings of UAPs are denigrated, are

somehow dismissed or disregarded.            They need to be

protected.

This is a huge issue for national security because,

number one, we do not have domain awareness, which is very

problematic.    Number two, we do not have domain superiority

if we do not understand how different UAPs are flying, what

technology they are using, what their mission is, what their

purpose is.    And at the base level, we have so many UAPs

around our bases, around our military sites, around our

nuclear sites, and it is a deeply disturbing that

adversaries, at a minimum, could be using these

opportunities to spy, to glean intelligence that will harm

our long-term national security.

So I am grateful that you are taking the whistleblowers

very seriously.    I am grateful that AARO is trying its best

to integrate the private sector, the public into their work.

Interestingly, in this hearing, we heard that the FAA

is now working hand-in-glove, which is very helpful.            We

want this public-facing accessibility to be put in place by

2025, so that people can upload their videos, their data,

their reports.

I have met with people who have followed this issue for

decades, and they have thousands of examples, thousands of

pieces of data, that ultimately I want uploaded into AARO so

you can cross-reference historic information with current

information.    Because this group at AARO are the best

scientists that we can find anywhere, and they will do the

work that is needed to be done.        So I just want to thank you

for that.

And then with my last 42 seconds, can you tell us about

any of the cases that merit further analysis by your IC and

science and technology partners?         What is it that makes

these cases anomalous?    And a large number of reports are

placed in the active archive because AARO does not have

enough information.    What might prompt you to reopen a case

like that, and do you have any examples?

Dr. Kosloski:     Sure.   I will start with the active

archive case.    That is just the place where we put cases

where we do not have enough scientific information to

resolve them at that time, but we are always looking for

opportunities to correlate them to new cases that come in,

as the new cases come in, as well as enrich those cases with

additional data.

We do have one example that I am aware of where we were

able to correlate a number of observations of interesting

lights in the sky, and eventually we concluded that it was

multiple people observing Starlink flares, just as an

example.

Three cases that merit analysis that we are working on

right now, one we might be in the process of resolving, but

nonetheless, it is still interesting.

The first one was brought to us by a law enforcement

officer out West, where he observed a large orange orb

floating several hundred feet above the ground, a couple of

miles away.   He went to investigate what was going on with

that orb, and as he was pulling up to the location where he

thought would be below the orb, about 40 to 60 meters away

from some object, the area was well lit, he saw a blacker

than black object.   He said it was about the size of a

Prius, 4 to 6 feet wide.   And as he got 40 to 60 meters away

from the object it tilted up about 45 degrees, and then it

shot up vertically, he says 10 to 100 times faster than

anything drone he has ever seen before.     And it did that

without making a sound, as far as he could tell from inside

of his vehicle.   And just as it left his field of view

through his windshield then it emitted very bright red and

blue lights that illuminated the inside of his vehicle, as

brightly as if someone had set off fireworks just outside

his vehicle, or street flares.

So that is anomalous because of the size of the vehicle

with the great acceleration, and when he came back to

investigate that area he found no disturbance of the ground

beneath it.   So that is one interesting one.

Another one comes to us from Southeast U.S.      There was

a U.S. facility where two cars of government contractors

were leaving the facility, around 9:00 in the morning.         They

looked up in the sky and saw a large metallic cylinder,

about the size of a commercial airplane, and it was

stationary.   They observed that there was a very bright,

white light behind or around the object.      The saw it

stationary for 15 to 20 seconds, and then it disappeared.

Obviously, an object that large, stationary unless it is a

blimp, is unusual, but then disappearing, we cannot explain

how that would happen.

And then the last case was interesting.      We had an

aircraft that was flying parallel to another aircraft and it

was capturing imagery of it, and a small-looking object

appeared to fly between the two of them, much faster than

them.   Through very careful analysis we think that the

object might have actually been further away than the object

that it was videotaping, but it requires very careful

analysis to come to those conclusions, and we do not have

the metadata to support that yet.

Senator Gillibrand:     Senator Ernst.

Senator Ernst:   Yes.    Thank you, Madam Chair.   And Dr.

Kosloski, you mentioned that you do work with the

intelligence community.     You are working with the FAA.             Has

AARO involved academia?     Have you gone to universities?              Do

you have outside organizations that you are working with,

and if so, can you walk us through some of that

collaboration?

Dr. Kosloski:    Sure.    Right now most of our

collaborations that are veering towards academia are with

your university affiliate and research centers associated

with universities or with FFRDCs.             Our partnership with

university, I would say, is lacking right now.             We have some

one-off associations with university professors.             However,

that is our fault, and it is largely because of the need to

be classified data.    We need to give the professors

something to work on before we can really engage them.

So we are working significantly on the declassification

effort.   We have hired a number of declassification experts,

and we are going to be trying to get cases like the ones

that I just discussed here declassified so that we can

engage with the universities on a regular basis and provide

them the data.   Talking to a scientist without data is going

to be rather disappointing.       So hopefully in 2025, we will

be increasing those efforts.

Senator Ernst:    All right.       Well, I appreciate that.           I

think there is a huge pool of talent out there that you

should tap into.

Given the public's growing concern and interest in

UAPs, how do you balance the need for the transparency that

our public is demanding with the potential risks of

revealing classified defense information?

Dr. Kosloski:    Yeah, that is always a concern that is

on the front of our minds.     We want to make sure that we are

deconflicting both on potential U.S. programs and what the

IC might be tracking for adversarial programs, as we are

aggregating that information and preparing to share it.

However, oftentimes we can remove the discussion of the

unidentified and anomalous activity from the sensitive

information that our partners are concerned with.         And that

is usually going to be the platforms that the information

was collected with, if it is truly anomalous.         And so we

have our partners working alongside in the declassification

of that data.

Senator Ernst:    Very good.      And then without having to

explain the UAP, what do we need to begin really doing about

them?   What precautions can we take?        What should we be

doing about them?

Dr. Kosloski:    I think that removing the stigma,

reducing the stigma, is the first step.         We need to make

sure that we are having honest and transparent conversations

about them.   Because if we are hesitant to discuss them,

then it opens the opportunity for an adversary, as you had

mentioned earlier, Senator Gillibrand, to come in and

conduct some activity.

So we need to do that, and we need to have more

persistent monitoring and understand that whether it is a

UAP or a counter-UAS issue, that we need to have that

complain domain awareness around our national security

facilities.

Senator Ernst:     Wonderful.      Thank you.    Thank you,

Madam Chair.

Senator Gillibrand:     Just a couple of follow-up

questions.    We did not discuss in this setting the most

recent UAP, or UAS, encounter with bases like Langley.             I

know that the incursion by UASs that were publicly made

available through the press that took over 2 weeks was

fairly alarming to Senators, because there was a question

about what technology they were using, there was a question

about why it was so hard to detect.

Can you speak to how AARO will be integrated into the

review of these kinds of cases and how you can be helpful to

both the intelligence community and the Department of

Defense in analyzing or being able to more quickly analyze

what is knowable and what is not knowable.          Because once you

do identify it is a drone, for example, it then goes to the

right department at DoD or the intelligence community to

assess, deal with, or take down, as the incident might be.

But talk to us a little bit about what role you can

play, for both the DoD and the IC community in these kinds

of incursions that are happening when we do not know what

tech is being used and we do not understand a flight

pattern, we do not understand how they arrive and depart in

the way they do.

Dr. Kosloski:   Yeah.    We are generally going to be

supporting them through an advisory capacity.       As an

organization that naturally needs to conduct baseline

experiments of the environment to see what normal looks

like, whether it is balloons, birds, anomalous activity, or

drones flying through an environment, we are going to gather

a lot of data that will allow us to characterize an

environment very well and then detect and follow those

tracks, hopefully rather efficiently.

There is also a lot of overlap in the type of sensors

that are going to be used for the counter-UAS mission and

the UAP mission, whether that is active detection like

radars, or passive like cameras.       So as AARO is trying to

push the bounds on detectability for UAP, we are hopefully

going to have best practices that we can also provide to the

counter-UAS, and potentially we might have additional

technologies that we can offer them to support.

Senator Gillibrand:     I would like to just address a

little bit of reporting and feedback.       As you know, AARO is

required to develop a mechanism for the public to report UAP

information.   Now that that mechanism for current and former

military, civilian, and contractor personnel has been

established, can you speak to AARO's plans for a public

reporting mechanism, and how did AARO arrive at this

approach, and were other options considered?

And second, for pilots and operators who have reported

a UAP, what feedback, if any, has AARO provided to these

individuals related to what AARO is doing with their report

and how the report has been resolved?       How does such

feedback, or lack thereof, impact the frequency of UAP

reporting?

Dr. Kosloski:   Yeah.   The public reporting mechanism

that we have decided to go with is going to look similar to

the reporting mechanism that we currently have for

historical events, where we are going to ask folks to go to

our website, download a PDF form, put in the narrative for

their account, and then email that to us with accompanying

media.   Usually it will probably be imagery.

We went with that option because we thought, one, we

could do it rather quickly, we could do it efficiently, make

it very cost effective for the taxpayer.       But also we think

we can gather all the data that we are going to need to

conduct our analysis.   And then we are going to have that

feed into an automated processing system that will cross-

correlate that against all the other public reported cases

as well as the U.S. government cases.

We did consider a number of other reporting mechanisms,

to included automated online forms as well as cellphone

apps, and we ultimately decided that this would be the

safest, cheapest, and easiest to maintain in the future,

while protecting the private information of the individuals

who are reporting.

Regarding the feedback from the result reports, right

now we do not have a good feedback mechanism.     It is fairly

informal.   We are working on building a case management

system that AARO will use at all classification levels, and

hopefully in that we will be able to provide feedback.      As

the case is going through the resolution process -- we have

multiple phases -- then the folks who report that, whether

it is a pilot at the classified level or someone potentially

reporting through another mechanism, they will get that

automated feedback.

And then it is not determined at this point yet how

much information we will be able to include in that feedback

where it is in the process.     It will depend on the

classification of the resolution of the case.

Senator Gillibrand:    My final question is, is there

anything that you need to tell the Senate that you need from

us, whether it is funding, whether it is support, whether it

is legislation.    Is there any request that AARO has of us,

or anything else you need to brief us on, for us to be able

to do our job to protect our servicemembers as well as

integrate public interest and public data and information

into the future analysis efforts of AARO?

Dr. Kosloski:    First of all, I want to say thank you

again.    I think that the authorities that we have are

remarkable, and I think that we are well-resourced as an

office.    The only ask I would have is that you continue to

champion us, particularly with witnesses, encourage them to

come forward and report to us so that we can have a more

fulsome investigation of the potential historic or ongoing

legacy programs.

Senator Gillibrand:    Thank you so much.   Hearing

adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 5:10 p.m., the subcommittee was

adjourned.]

