Stenographic Transcript
                        Before the


     Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities


                    COMMITTEE ON
                   ARMED SERVICES


        UNITED STATES SENATE
        HEARING TO RECEIVE TESTIMONY ON
THE MISSION, ACTIVITIES, OVERSIGHT, AND BUDGET OF
  THE ALL-DOMAIN ANOMALY RESOLUTION OFFICE


                Wednesday, April 19, 2023


                     Washington, D.C.


            ALDERSON COURT REPORTING
                1111 14TH STREET NW
                      SUITE 1050
              WASHINGTON, D.C. 20005
                    (202) 289-2260
               www.aldersonreporting.com


HEARING TO RECEIVE TESTIMONY ON THE

MISSION, ACTIVITIES, OVERSIGHT, AND BUDGET OF THE

ALL-DOMAIN ANOMALY RESOLUTION OFFICE


Wednesday, April 19, 2023


U.S. Senate

Subcommittee on Emerging

Threats and Capabilities

Committee on Armed Services

Washington, D.C.


The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:08 a.m.

in Room SR-232A, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon.

Kirsten E. Gillibrand, chairwoman of the subcommittee,

presiding.

Subcommittee Members Present:           Senators Gillibrand

[presiding], Rosen, and Ernst.


OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, U.S.

SENATOR FROM NEW YORK

Senator Gillibrand:    The hearing will come to order.

I would first like to thank our witness, Dr. Sean

Kirkpatrick, for testifying here and in today's earlier

closed session, and for his long and distinguished career

both in the intelligence community and in the Department of

Defense.

Dr. Kirkpatrick is the director of the All-Domain

Anomaly Resolution Office, or AARO.         Congress established

this office in law to get to the bottom of the very serious

problem of unidentified anomalous phenomena, or UAP.

Dr. Kirkpatrick has a very difficult mission.          While we

have made progress there remains a stigma attached to these

phenomenon.   There is a vast and complex citizen engagement

and there is also very challenging scientific and technical

hurdles.

So we appreciate the willingness of Dr. Kirkpatrick to

lean in on this issue and the work that he has accomplished

thus far and we look forward to both his opening statement

and his presentation of examples of the work AARO has done.

In late 2017 media reports surfaced about activities

set in motion by the late long-serving Majority Leader

Senator Harry Reid more than a decade ago.         We learned that

there was strong evidence of advanced technology reflected


in the features and performance characteristics of many

objects observed by our highly-trained service members

operating top of the line military equipment.

We learned that for at least the past eight years

military pilots frequently encountered unknown objects in

controlled airspace off both the East and West Coasts,

across the continental United States, in test and training

areas and ranges.

We do not know where they are -- they come from, who

made them, or how they operate.         As former Deputy Secretary

of Defense David Norquist observed, had any of these objects

had the label made in China there would be an uproar in the

government and media.   There would be no stone unturned and

no effort spared to find out what we were dealing with.

We can look at the recent incursion of the unidentified

PRC high-altitude balloon as an example and because of the

UFO stigma the response has been irresponsibly anemic and

slow.

Congress established AARO.         We made it clear that we

expect vigorous action.     We added very substantial initial

funding for the office.     But despite our best efforts the

President's budget for fiscal years '23 and '24 requested

only enough funding to defray the operating expenses of

AARO.

It included almost no funds to sustain the critical


research and development necessary to support a serious

investigation.   It took a letter to Secretary Austin from

Senator Rubio and me and 14 other senators to get the office

temporary relief for the current fiscal year.

In this hearing I intend to probe a series of specific

issues.   In the recent incidents where multiple objects were

shot down over North America it seemed that Pentagon

leadership did not turn to AARO office to play a leading

role in advising the combatant commander.

We need to know whether this will continue.           We need to

know whether the leadership in DOD will bring AARO into the

decision-making process in a visible way and we need to know

what role AARO will play in interagency coordination after

the NSC Working Group disbands.

In the fiscal year 2023 National Defense and

Intelligence Authorization Act Congress established a direct

reporting chain from the AARO director to the Deputy

Secretary of Defense.

The role of the Office of the Under Secretary of

Defense for Intelligence and Security is limited to

providing administrative support.           We need to know how this

direction is being implemented.

UAP are frequently observed flying in extremely high or

very low speeds and come in various sizes and shapes.

During the recent shoot downs over North America DOD


disclosed that filters on radar systems were adjusted to

allow for detection and tracking of diverse sets of objects

for the first time.   While opening the aperture can overload

the real-time analytic process we cannot keep turning a

blind eye to surveillance data that is critical to detecting

and tracking UAP.

We need to know whether Dr. Kirkpatrick could achieve

the necessary control over sensor filters and the storage

and access to raw surveillance data to find UAP anomalies.

Finally, one of the tasks Congress set for AARO is

serving as an open door for witnesses of UAP events or

participants in government activities related to UAPs to

come forward securely and disclose what they know without

fear of retribution for any possible violations of

previously signed nondisclosure agreements.

Congress mandated that AARO set up a publicly

discoverable and accessible process for safe disclosure.

While we know that AARO has already conducted a significant

number of interviews, many referred by Congress, we need to

set up a public process that -- and we need to know where

that effort stands.

With that, I would like to turn to Senator Ernst for

her opening statement.


STATEMENT OF HON. JONI ERNST, U.S. SENATOR FROM IOWA

Senator Ernst:    Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you,

Dr. Kirkpatrick, for your testimony today.   I will keep

these remarks very brief so that we have maximum time for

your briefing.

The recent downing of the Chinese surveillance balloon

and three other objects underscores the need for domain

awareness.   Adversaries like China and Russia are working to

hold U.S. interests, including our homeland, at risk.   That

is why your testimony is so important and I so look forward

to a progress update on the establishment of your office.

As members know, your office evolved from the Navy-led

Unidentified Aerial Phenomena Task Force to the All-Domain

Anomalous Resolution Office known as AARO.

Dr. Kirkpatrick, your extensive background in science

and technology, research and development, and space makes

you well suited to discuss these emerging challenges.

My priority is that we understand the full range of

threats posed by our adversaries in all domains.   That is

what the joint force needs to be prepared to fight and win

in defense of our nation.

This committee needs to know about Chinese or Russian

advanced technology programs to exploit our vulnerabilities

and it needs to know whether your office, along with the IC,

has detected potential Chinese or Russian capabilities to


surveille or attack us.

Finally, we need to ensure efficient interagency

coordination.   Multiple elements of the DOD and IC own a

piece of this mission.    To add value, AARO's efforts cannot

be redundant with others.

Thank you again.     We look forward to your testimony.

Senator Gillibrand:      Dr. Kirkpatrick, you can give your

testimony.


STATEMENT OF DR. SEAN M. KIRKPATRICK, DIRECTOR, ALL-

DOMAIN ANOMALY RESOLUTION OFFICE

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    Thank you, Chairwoman Gillibrand,

Ranking Member Ernst, and distinguished members of the

subcommittee.   It is a privilege to be here today to testify

on the Defense -- Defense's efforts to address unidentified

anomalous phenomena.

First, I want to thank Congress for its extensive and

continued partnership as the department works to better

understand and respond to UAP in an effort to minimize

technical and intelligence surprise.

Unidentified objects in any domain pose potential risks

to safety and security, particularly from military personnel

and capabilities.    Congress and DOD agree that UAP cannot

remain unexamined or unaddressed.

We are grateful for sustained congressional engagement

on this issue, which paved the way for the DOD's

establishment of the All-Domain Anomaly Resolution Office in

July of last year.

Though AARO is still a young office, the spotlight on

UAP in recent months underscores the importance of its work

and the need for UAP to be taken seriously as a matter of

national security.

All leadership that I have had the pleasure of working

with, whether DOD, IC, DOE, civil, scientific, or industrial


view Congress as a critical partner in this endeavor.    AARO

has accomplished much in the last nine months since it was

established.   The AARO team of more than three dozen experts

is organized around four functional areas: operations,

scientific research, integrated analysis, and strategic

communications.

In the nine months since AARO's establishment we have

taken important steps to involve and improve UAP data

collection, standardize the department's UAP internal

reporting requirements, and implement a framework for

rigorous scientific and intelligence analysis, allowing us

to resolve cases in a systematic and prioritized manner.

Meanwhile, consistent with legislative direction, AARO

is also carefully reviewing and researching the U.S.

government's UAP-related historical record.   AARO is leading

a focused effort to better characterize, understand, and

attribute UAP with priority given to UAP reports by DOD and

IC personnel in or near areas of national security

importance.

DOD fully appreciates the eagerness from many quarters,

especially here in Congress and in the American public, to

quickly resolve every UAP encountered across the globe from

the distant past through today.

It is important to note, however, AARO is the

culmination of decades of DOD, intelligence community, and


congressionally-directed efforts to successfully resolve UAP

encountered first and foremost by U.S. military personnel,

specifically Navy and Air Force pilots.

The law establishing AARO is ambitious and it will take

time to realize the full mission.           We cannot answer decades

of questions about UAP all at once but we must begin

somewhere.

While I assure you that AARO will follow scientific

evidence wherever it leads, I ask for your patience as DOD

first prioritizes the safety and security of our military

personnel and installations in all domains.

After all, UAP encountered first by highly capable DOD

and IC platforms featuring the nation's most advanced

sensors are those UAP most likely to be resolved by my

office, assuming the data can be collected.

If AARO succeeds in first improving the ability of

military personnel to quickly and confidently resolve UAP

they encounter I believe that in time we will have greatly

advanced the capability of the entire United States

government, including its civilian agencies, to resolve UAP.

However, it would be naive to believe that the

resolution of all UAP can be solely accomplished by the DOD

and IC alone.   We will need to prioritize collection and

leverage authorities for monitoring all domains within the

continental United States.


AARO's ultimate success will require partnerships with

the interagency, industry partners, academia, and the

scientific community as well as the public.

AARO is partnering with the services, intelligence

community, DOE, as well as civil partners and across the

U.S. government to tap into the resources of the

interagency.

The UAP challenge is more an operational and scientific

issue than it is an intelligence issue.          As such, we are

working with industry, academia, and the scientific

community which bring their own resources, ideas, and

expertise to this challenging problem set.

Robust collaboration and peer review across a broad

range of partners will promote greater objectivity and

transparency in the study of UAP.

I want to underscore today that only a very small

percentage of UAP reports display signatures that could

reasonably be described as anomalous.          The majority of

unidentified objects reported to AARO demonstrate mundane

characteristics of balloons, unmanned aerial systems,

clutter, natural phenomena, or other readily explainable

sources.

While a large number of cases in our holdings remain

technically unresolved, this is primarily due to a lack of

data associated with those cases.          Without sufficient data


we are unable to reach defendable conclusions that meet the

high scientific standards we set for resolution and I will

not close a case that I cannot defend the conclusions of.

I recognize that this answer is unsatisfying to those

who in good faith assume that what they see with their eyes,

with their cameras, and with their radars is

incontrovertible evidence of extraordinary characteristics

and performance.

Yet, time and again with sufficient scientific quality

data it is fact that UAP often but not always resolve into

readily explainable sources.    Humans are subject to

deception and illusions, sensors to unexpected responses and

malfunctions and, in some cases, intentional interference.

Getting to the handful of cases that pass this level of

scrutiny is the mission of AARO.

That is not to say that UAP once resolved are no longer

of national security interest, however.    On the contrary,

learning that a UAP is not of exotic origin but is instead

just a quadcopter or a balloon leads to the question of who

is operating that quadcopter and to what purpose.    The

answers to those questions will inform potential national

security or law enforcement responses.

AARO is a member of the department's support to the

administration's Tiger Team effort to deal with

stratospheric objects such as the PRC high-altitude balloon.


When previously unknown objects are successfully identified

it is AARO's role to quickly and efficiently hand off such

readily explainable objects to the intelligence, law

enforcement, or operational safety communities for further

analysis and appropriate action.

In other words, AARO's mission is to turn UAP into SEP,

somebody else's problem.   The U.S. government, the DOD, and

the IC in particular has tremendous capabilities to deal

with those encountered objects.

In the wake of the PRC HAB event the interagency is

working to better integrate and share information to address

identifiable stratospheric objects but that is not AARO's

lane.

Meanwhile, for the few cases in all domains -- space,

air, and sea -- that do demonstrate potentially anomalous

characteristics AARO exists to help the DOD, IC, and

interagency resolve those anomalous cases.

In doing so AARO is approaching these cases with the

highest level of objectivity and analytic rigor.    This

includes physically testing and employing, modeling, and

simulation to validate our analyses and underlying theories,

then peer reviewing those results within the U.S.

government, industry partners, and appropriately cleared

academic institutions before reaching any conclusions.

I should also state clearly for the record that in our


research AARO has found no credible evidence thus far of

extraterrestrial activity, off world technology, or objects

that defy the known laws of physics.

In the event sufficient scientific data wherever

obtained that a UAP encountered can only be explained by

extraterrestrial origin, we are committed to working with

our interagency partners at NASA to appropriately inform

U.S. government's leadership of its findings.

For those few cases that have leaked to the public

previously and subsequently commented on by the U.S.

government I encourage those who hold alternative theories

or views to submit your research to credible peer-reviewed

scientific journals.    AARO is working very hard to do the

same.    That is how science works, not by blog or social

media.

We know that there is tremendous public interest in UAP

and a desire for answers from AARO.          By its very nature the

UAP challenge has for decades lent itself to mystery,

sensationalism, and even conspiracy.

For that reason, AARO remains committed to

transparency, accountability, and to sharing as much with

the American public as we can consistent with our obligation

to protect not only intelligence sources and methods but

U.S. and allied capabilities.

However, AARO's work will take time if we are committed


to do it right.    It means adhering to the scientific method

and the highest standards of research integrity.         It means

being methodical and scrupulous.         It means withholding

judgment in favor of evidence.

It means following the data where it leads wherever it

leads.    It means establishing scientific peer-reviewed

theoretical underpinnings of observed data, and AARO is

committed to all of those standards.

I am proud of AARO's progress over the last nine

months.    Much remains to be done but the hard work is

underway.

Thank you for your continued support, and before we

turn to questions I am going to walk you through some of our

analytical trends in a couple of cases that we have

prepared.

[Chart is shown.]

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    So one of the things that AARO does

is high-integrity analysis, as I have said.         This chart

represents the trend analysis of all the cases in AARO's

holdings to date.

What you will see on the left is a histogram of all of

our reported sightings as a function of altitude.         So most

of our sightings occur in the 15,000- to 25,000-foot range

and that is ultimately because that is where a lot of our

aircraft are.


On the far right upper corner you will see a breakout

of the morphologies of all of the UAP that are reported.

Over half, about 52 percent, of what has been reported to us

are round or spheres.    The rest of those break out into all

kinds of different other shapes.

The gray box is, essentially, there is no data on what

its shape is.    Either it was not reported or the sensor did

not collect it.    The bottom map is a heat map of all

reporting areas across the globe that we have available to

us.

What you will notice is that there is a heavy what we

call collection bias both in altitude and in geographic

location.    That is where all of our sensors exist.       That is

where our training ranges are.         That is where our

operational ranges are.     That is where all of our platforms

are.

In the middle what we have done is reduce the most

typically reported UAP characteristics to these fields,

mostly round, mostly one to four meters, white, silver,

translucent, metallic 10,000 to 30,000 feet with apparent

velocities from stationary to Mach two.

No thermal exhausts are usually detected.       We get

intermittent radar returns, we get intermittent radio

returns, and we get intermittent thermal signatures.         That

is what we are looking for in trying to understand what that


is.

Next slide.

So I am going to walk you through two cases that we

have declassified recently.     This first one is an MQ-9 in

the Middle East observing that blow up, which is an apparent

spherical object, via EO sensors.           Those are not IR.

If you want to go ahead and click that and play it, you

will see it come through the top of the screen -- there it

goes -- and then the camera will slew to follow it.             You

will see it pop in and out of the field of view there.

This is, essentially, all of the data we have

associated with this event from some years ago.           It is going

to be virtually impossible to fully identify that just based

off of that video.

Now, what we can do and what we are doing is keeping

that as part of that group of 52 percent to see what are the

similarities, what are the trends across all these, do we

see these in a particular distribution, do they all behave

the same or not.

As we get more data we will be able to go back and look

at these in a fuller context.      How are we going to get more

data?   We are working with the joint staff to issue guidance

to all the services and commands that will then establish

what are the reporting requirements, the timeliness, and all

of the data that is required to be delivered to us and


retained from all the associated sensors.

That, historically, has not been the case and it has

been happenstance that data has been collected.

Next slide.

This particular event, South Asia MQ-9 looking at

another MQ-9, and what is highlighted there in that red

circle is an object that flies through the screen.          Unlike

the previous one, this one actually shows some really

interesting things that everyone thought was truly anomalous

to start with.

First of all, it is a high-speed object that is flying

in the field of regard of two MQ-9s.          Second, it appears to

have this trail behind it, which at first blush you would

think that looks like a propulsion trail.

In reality, if you want to play the first slide we will

show you what that looks like in real time, or first video.

So we are looking at that.    There it goes.        Why do you not

play it again and then pause it halfway through?          Right

there.   All right.

You might be able to see that trail there behind it.

That is actually not a real trail.          That is a sensor

artifact.   Each one of those little blobs is actually a

representation of the object as it is moving through, and

later in the video as the camera slews that trail actually

follows the direction of the camera, not the direction of


the object.

We pulled these apart frame by frame.             We were able to

demonstrate that that is essentially a readout overlap of

the image.    It is a shadow image.          It is not real.

Further, if you later follow this all the way to end it

starts to resolve itself into that blob that is in that

picture in the top right and if you squint it looks like an

aircraft because it actually turns out to be an aircraft.

Go ahead and put that on.

So you will see the tail sort of pop out there and so

what you are looking at is -- this is in the infrared --

this is the heat signature off of the engines of a commuter

aircraft that happened to be flying in the vicinity of where

those two MQ-9s were at.

Why am I showing you this?         So the first one that I

showed you we do not have resolved yet.            That is an

unresolved case we are still studying.            This one we can

resolve.    But this is the kind of data that we have to work

with and the type of analysis that we have to do, which can

be quite extensive when you have to pull these apart frame

by frame.

Further, we are now matching all of this with the

models of all of those imaging sensors so that I can say --

I can recreate this.    I can actually show how the sensor is

going to respond.    All of these sensors do not necessarily


respond the way you think they do, especially out in the

world and in the field.

And I believe that is all I have and I will open it up

for your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Kirkpatrick follows:]


Senator Gillibrand:    Thank you so much, Dr.

Kirkpatrick.

Can you just give us some raw numbers of how many UAPs

you have analyzed, how many have been resolved, and sort of

in what buckets and then how many are still left to be

resolved?   Just an update from your January public report

where it was 366 or something and about 150 were balloons

and about two dozen were drones.        Just give us an update if

you have one.

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    Sure.    So as of this week we are

tracking over -- a total of 650 cases.        Now, the report in

January basically said about half of the ones at that time,

about 150, were balloon -- were likely balloon like or

something like that.   That does not mean they are resolved.

Senator Gillibrand:    Oh, I see.

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    Okay.    So what -- let me walk

everyone through what our analytic process looks like.

We have, essentially, a five-step process.         So we have

-- we get our cases in with all the data.        We create a case

for that event.   My team does a preliminary scrub of all of

those cases as they come in to sort out do we have any

information that says this is in one of those likely

categories -- it is likely a balloon, it is likely a balloon

-- a bird, it is likely some other object or we do not know.

Then we prioritize those based off of where they are.


Are they attached to a national security area?         Does it show

some anomalous phenomenology that is of interest?         If it is

just -- if it is just a spherical thing that is floating

around with the -- with the wind and it has no payload on it

that is going to be less important than something that has a

payload on it, which will be less important than something

that is maneuvering.

So there is sort of a hierarchy of just binning the

priorities because we cannot do all of them at once.         Once

we do that and we prioritize them we take that package of

data in that case, and I have set up two teams.         Think of

this as a red team, blue team, or competitive analysis.

I have an intelligence community team made up of

intelligence analysts and I have an S&T team made up of

scientists and engineers and the people that actually build

a lot of these sensors or physicists because if you are a

physicist you can do anything and -- but they are not

associated with the intel community.         They are not intel

officers.   They look at this through the lens of the sensor

of what the data says.

We give that package to both teams.          The intelligence

community is going to look at it through the lens of the

intelligence record and what they assess and their intel

tradecraft, which they have very specific rules and

regulations on how they do that.


The scientific community, technical community, is going

to look at it through the lens of what is the data telling

me, what is the sensor doing, what would I expect a sensor

response to be, and back that out.

Those two groups give us their answers.       We then

adjudicate.   If they agree then I am more likely to close

that case if they agree on what it is.        If they disagree we

will have an adjudication.    We will bring them together.        We

will take a look at the differences.        We will adjudicate why

do you say one thing and you say another.

We will then come to a case -- a recommendation.        That

will get written up by my team.       That then goes to a senior

technical advisory group, which is outside of all of those

people made up of senior technical folks and intel analysts

and operators from retired, out of the community, and they

essentially peer review what that case recommendation is.

They write their recommendations.       That comes back to

me.   I review it, we make a determination, and I will sign

off one way or the other and then that will go out as the

case determination.

Once we have an approved web portal to hang the

unclassified stuff we will -- we would downgrade and

declassify things and put it out there.

In the meantime, we are putting a lot of these on our

classified web portal where we can then collaborate with the


rest of the community so they can see what is going on.

In a nutshell, that is the process.       So because of

that, that takes time.    So of those over 650 we have

prioritized about half of them to be of anomalous

interesting value and now we have to go through those and

go, how much do I have actual data for because if all I have

is an operator report that says I saw X, Y, or Z, my

assessment is A, B, or C, that is not really sufficient.

That is a good place to start but I have to have data.

I have to have radar data.     I have to have EO data.    I have

to have thermal data.    I have to have overhead data, and we

need to look at all that.

Now, from a big picture perspective I still have --

that is all -- they are still very valuable data and we are

looking at applying a lot of things -- new tools, analytic

tools, like natural language processing.       So I can go across

all of those reports and look for commonalities.

How many of them are being described as round spherical

objects that are maneuvering?       How many of them are not

maneuvering?   How many of them seem to have a plume to it or

note?   That is also going to be very valuable to give us

more of a global picture and a trends analysis of what are

we seeing and help us get to the determination.

So to go back to your question, ma'am, we have -- this

next quarterly report will be coming out here pretty soon.


Our next annual report you all have given us -- moved it up

to June, July -- we are going to be having that done about

that timeframe and we will have a -- we will be combining a

whole number of reports into that one.

I think we are currently sitting at around -- if I

remember correctly, we are around 20 to 30-ish or about

halfway through that analytic process.       A handful of them

have made it all the way out to the other side, gone through

peer review.   We have got case closure reports done and

signed.

We are going to get faster as we get more people on

board and we get more of the community tools to automate

some of the analysis that has to be done.

Senator Gillibrand:    Thank you, Dr. Kirkpatrick.

Senator Ernst?

Senator Ernst:   Thank you, Madam Chair.

And Dr. Kirkpatrick, the ODNI annual threat assessment

states that China's space activities are designed to erode

U.S. influence across military, technological, economic, and

diplomatic spheres.

Likewise, Russia will remain a key space competitor.

In the course of your work have you become aware of any

Chinese or Russia technical advancements to surveille or

attack U.S. interests?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    That is a great question.     Part of


what we have to do as we go through these, especially the

ones that show signatures of advanced technical

capabilities, is determine if there is a foreign nexus.

That is really hard if what we observe does not have a

Chinese or Russian flag on the side of it.

Now, I think it is prudent to say of the -- of the

cases that are showing some sort of advanced technical

signature of which we are talking single percentages of the

entire population of cases we have.         I am concerned about

what that nexus is and I have indicators that some are

related to foreign capabilities.

We have to investigate that with our IC partners and as

we get evidence to support that that gets then handed off to

the appropriate IC agency to investigate.         Again, it becomes

an SEP at that point.

Senator Ernst:    Yeah, somebody else's problem.

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    Right.

Senator Ernst:    Very good.      Thank you.    Yes.

Is it possible that the Chinese or Russian advanced

technologies could be causing some of these anomalous

behaviors?   And you said there seems to be some indicators.

So just for us today could you describe a potential threat

that might exist out there if they are of foreign nexus?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    Sure.    In order to do this research

appropriately we have to also be cognizant of what is the


state of the art in development across the S&T community.

What is -- what are the DARPAs of the world doing?          What are

our -- what is the horizon scanning of emerging technologies

appropriate to this subcommittee?

What is happening out there, and if somebody could

accelerate that capability how would that manifest itself

and what would it look like and do those signatures match

what we are seeing?

There are emerging capabilities out there that in many

instances Russia and China -- well, China in particular are

on par or ahead of us in some areas.

So previously I used to be the Defense Department's

intelligence officer for science and technical intelligence.

That was our job was to look for what does all that look

like.   And then my last several years, of course, in Space

Command doing space.

The adversary is not waiting.          They are advancing and

they are advancing quickly.     If I were to put on some of my

old hats I would tell you they are less risk averse at

technical advancement than we are.          They are just willing to

try things and see if it works.

Are there capabilities that could be employed against

us in both and ISR and a weapons fashion?          Absolutely.    Do I

have evidence that they are doing it in these cases?          No,

but I have concerning indicators.


Senator Ernst:   Thank you.        I appreciate that and that

is why it is so important that you are working with the

intelligence community as well because you have the science,

the data background, but you also need to know from various

sources what adversaries may be working on, correct?

Okay.   Thank you.    Thank you very much.      Thank you,

Madam Chair.

Senator Gillibrand:     Senator Rosen?

Senator Rosen:   Well, thank you, Chair Gillibrand,

Ranking Member Ernst.    This is a really important hearing.

I would like to thank you, Dr. Kirkpatrick, for your

service to the country and as a former systems analyst

myself I really appreciate your flowchart, the description

of the process, and particularly the trends analysis, going

forward, how that is going to help us and you talked about

language, the large LLMs -- the large language models of

artificial intelligence.    That is really going to help us in

the hunt forward, predictive analysis, I think, to some of

your point what we worry about.

But I want to focus on Nevada because I want to talk

about the impact of UAPs on aviation safety.        So when it

comes to unidentified aerial phenomenal -- phenomena, excuse

me -- one of my first concerns is really about the safety of

Nevada's military aviator.

So we have airmen stationed at Nellis Air Force Base,


naval aviators flying at Naval Air Station Fallon, and

service members across -- from across the world training at

the Nevada test and training range.           I know you know all

this.

And, unfortunately, the existence of advanced UAPs in

the U.S. airspace and over U.S. military installations not a

new phenomenon.    The Navy has officially acknowledged that

between 2004 and 2021 11 near misses occurred involving UAPs

that required pilot action and follow-up reports.

As a result, in 2019 the Navy established a protocol

for pilots to report on their dangerous encounters.            So

could you speak to any ongoing efforts within DOD to ensure

the safety of our aviators with a potential UAP encounter

and what is your relationship with NORTHCOM, NORAD, SPACECOM

when it comes to this immediate real-time response and how

-- they are there right there in the moment, right?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    Absolutely.         That is a great

question.

So let me start with my relationship with the commands

are very good.    I just came back from sitting down with

General VanHerck and all the all the J staff out at NORTHCOM

a couple weeks ago talking through exactly what we need to

do to help them get their arms around this.

We are also working very closely with Joint Staff and

the Joint Staff has just been very outstanding in helping


work through policy and guidance issues to the forces and to

the services, and I would like to just make sure that we

message back to all of the operators the importance of their

reporting and the fact that you are about to get a bunch of

new requirements that we are issuing through the Joint Staff

on all of the data that we are going to need you to save and

report back to us.

It is invaluable and we are working to try to take the

most advantage of that to learn what it is that we are

trying to mitigate.

To get directly to your question, the first thing that

we are doing is normalizing our reporting.   We are

standardizing our reporting and the requirements associated

with that.

Guidance from the Joint Staff, I think, goes out maybe

this week, maybe next week, that we have been working with

them for some months that does exactly what I just said.     It

gives them timelines.   It gives them requirements.   It gives

them here is all the data you have to have and you have got

to retain it.

The next thing that comes after that is a plan ord that

will go out to the commands for mitigation and response.     So

there is a couple of things that we have to do.

One, I need to work with the commands and with the IC

and with our -- outside of our DOD and IC partners to extend


our collection posture targeted at some of these key areas

that you saw on that heat map that have a lot of activity so

that we can turn on extra collection when an operator sees

something.

So part of this is generating as a response function in

what we call a tactic technique and procedure for an

operator when he sees something, calls back to the

operations floor.   They can turn on additional collection.

What does that collection look like?          How do I bring all

that together so I can get more data on what is that thing?

Senator Rosen:    Can I ask really quickly --

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   Sure.

Senator Rosen:    -- do you have the authorities you need

to extend your collection posture between agencies or

branches of the military?      Because that seems to me to maybe

be a sticking point.    I know my time is just about up.

I would love to follow up about your risk management

methodologies for some of these.          But do you need any

authorities that you do not have to get the data you need?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   There are some authorities that we

need.   We currently are operating under Title 10 authorities

but we have good relationships across the other agencies.

But having additional authorities for collection tasking,

counter-intelligence --

Senator Rosen:    That is something --


Mr. Kirkpatrick:   -- those are all things that would be

helpful, yes.

Senator Rosen:    Thank you.

Senator Gillibrand:    To follow up, Dr. Kirkpatrick,

will you help us write that language so we can put it in the

defense bill this year so that we know what authorities you

need?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   Mmm-hmm.       We can do that.

Senator Gillibrand:    Thank you.

We are going to start a second round.            So if you want

to stay you can ask another round.            I have at least three

more questions.

Senator Rosen:    I have about a million more questions.

Senator Gillibrand:    Do you want to -- do you want to

go right now so you -- in case you have to leave?

Senator Rosen:    I feel like I do.

Senator Gillibrand:    Yeah, go ahead.

Senator Rosen:    And if you could do that that would be

great.    I am going to stay on the drones issue because,

obviously, of the Air Force Base.            We talked about those in

-– the last category is the Chinese spy balloon.            It did

cross through the U.S. airspace, shot down by a Sidewinder

missile fired from an F-22.

Sidewinders costs us close to half a million dollars

each.    So given the cost of these missiles, the cost per


flight, all of these other things, like I said, a follow-up

from the authorities or methodologies to data collection.

They can help us in other ways.

But how do you think we can develop a sustainable

affordable response to UAPs where we need to that may --

that will definitely violate our airspace -- not may,

definitely violate our airspace every chance that they can

get because they are adversaries.             They want this

information.

So what do you think some cost effective measures might

be that we can get what we need out of that or take them

down, whatever is appropriate -- whatever the appropriate

measure is?    Let us put it that way.

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   So that is actually wrapped into the

plan ord that we are working with Joint Staff to send out --

what do the commands need from both a capabilities

perspective for kinetic and nonkinetic engagements, what are

the response functions of the particular wings or Navy, what

have you, and then what authorities do they need.

So one of the -- one of the challenges that we have

seen is there is an authorities issues with the -- with the

owners, operators of those ranges that they need to work

through and we are working that with the Joint Staff and

OSD.

So big picture we need to do all that.           If you want to


get down to the specifics for -- there are nonkinetic

options to engage pretty much everything whether it is

electronic warfare, whether it is laser technologies --

Senator Rosen:   That is where this data --

Mr. Kirkpatrick:     That is right.

Senator Rosen:   Having the good data collection,

predictive analytics, you can --

Mr. Kirkpatrick:     Correct.      Inform --

Senator Rosen:   -- possibly make some assumptions on

possibilities.

Mr. Kirkpatrick:     That is right, and we will inform

recommendations back to the department on here is what could

work, here is what we have seen work, here is what does not

work.

Senator Rosen:   Thank you so much.        Thank you, Madam

Chair.   Appreciate it.

Senator Gillibrand:     Thank you very much.

I just want to just talk a little bit about your

logistics, who you report to, how that is going, whether you

need different reporting lines.

By congressional legislation your office is

administratively located with the office of the Under

Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Security but you are

not substantively subordinate to the under secretary.

Rather, you are a direct report to the deputy


secretary.   Are you taking direction directly from the

deputy secretary?   Are you able to meet and brief the deputy

secretary?   Is the office of USDINS working with you to have

the right framework?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    So USDINS and the -- I currently

report to USDINS until they come up with the plan for how

they are going to implement legislation.

DOD and DNI are working through that now.      I would have

to refer you back to USDINS on what their plan is.

Senator Gillibrand:    Do I need to update your reporting

structure in the next defense bill or is this something that

you think will work its way out or does it need further

clarity?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    I think they are planning on coming

back to you with an answer on what that plan is and I think

at that time that will inform what you want to do.

Senator Gillibrand:    Okay.      Thank you.

As you know, Dr. Kirkpatrick, Congress has mandated

that your office establish a discoverable and accessible

electronic method for potential witnesses of UAP incidents

and potential participants in government UAP-related

activities to contact your office and tell their stories.

Congress also set up a process whereby people are

subject to nondisclosure agreements preventing them from

disclosing what they may have witnessed or participated in


could tell you what they know without risk of retribution

from the -- or violation of their NDAs.

Have you submitted a public-facing website product for

approval to your superiors and how long has it been under

review?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    I have.      We submitted the first

version of that before Christmas.

Senator Gillibrand:    And do you have an estimate from

them when they will respond and when you will have feedback

on that?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    No, I do not.

Senator Gillibrand:    Okay.      We will author a letter

asking for that timely response to your superiors.

When do you expect that you will establish a public-

facing discoverable and access portal for people to use to

contact your office as the law requires?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    So I would like to, first, say thank

you all very much for referring the witnesses that you have

thus far to us.   I appreciate that.         We have brought in

nearly two dozen so far.    It has been very helpful.

I would ask that you continue to do that until we have

an approved plan.    We have a multi-phased approach for doing

that that we have been socializing and have submitted for

approval sometime.    Once that happens then we should be able

to push all that out and get this a little more automated.


Senator Gillibrand:    Great.

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    What I would ask, though, is as you

all continue to refer to us and refer witnesses to us I

would appreciate if you do that.         Please try to prioritize

the ones that you want to do because we do have a small

research staff dealing with that.

Senator Gillibrand:    Thank you.       And then do you have

any plans for public engagement that you want to share now

that you think it is important that the public knows what

the plan is?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    So we have a number of public

engagement recommendations, according to our strategic plan.

All of those have been submitted for approval.         They have to

be approved by USDINS.    We are waiting for approval to go do

that.

Senator Gillibrand:    Okay.      I will follow up on that.

And then my last question is about the integration of

department's UAP operations, research, analysis, and

strategic communications.     During the recent UAP incidents

over North America it did not appear that you were allowed

to play that role.

Do you agree that the public perception is generally

that you and your office did not appear to play a major role

in the department's response to the detection of objects

over North America?


What can you tell us that is going on behind the scenes

from your perspective, and in the after action assessment

process is there awareness that there is a need to operate

differently in the future and a commitment to doing so?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   When the -- when the objects were

first detected I got called by Joint Staff leadership to

come in late one night to review events as they were

unfolding and to give them an assessment based on what we

knew at that time.

I did that.   I worked with the director of Joint Staff,

the J2 and the J3 that night and over the couple of

following days on what are the types of things that we are

tracking from an unidentified object perspective, what

databases do we use those sorts of things for known objects,

known tracking.

Beyond that, the response I would have to -- I would

have to refer you back to the White House for the decision

on how they did the response.     We did not play a role in

what you would respond other than that initial advice on

what we are seeing and how we are seeing it.

Senator Gillibrand:   Thank you.

Senator Ernst?

Senator Ernst:   Thank you, Madam Chair.

Dr. Kirkpatrick, I know that your office has gotten a

lot of attention recently and, of course, any new agency


there tends to be a push to increase size and funding.     We

want to make sure that you are able to meet your goals.

But what I also need to ensure is that we are not

duplicating or replicating existing functions and creating

redundancy within DOD and the interagency.

So what steps are you taking right now to make sure

that your particular office and function is unique to any of

the other agencies that might be involved in these types of

cases?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   Yeah, that is a great question.

So I would like to lay down here is one of my -- sort

of my mission and my goal and my vision here.   So the vision

is at one point -- at some point in the future you should

not need an AARO.

If I am successful in what I am doing we should be able

to normalize everything that we are doing into existing

processes, functions, agencies, and organizations and make

that part of their mission and their role.

Right now, the niche that we form is really going after

the unknowns.   If you -- I think you articulated it early on

this is a hunt mission for what might somebody be doing in

our backyard that we do not know about.

All right.   Well, that is what we are doing.   But at

some point we should be able to normalize that.   That is why

it is so important the work we are doing with Joint Staff to


normalize that into DOD policy and guidance.

We are bringing in all of our interagency partners.                So

NASA is providing a liaison for us.           I have FBI liaison.      I

have OSI liaison.   I have service liaisons.          Half of my

staff come from the IC.     Half of my staff come from other

scientific and technical backgrounds.           I have DOE.

And so what we are trying to do is ensure, again, as I

make UAP into SEP they get handed off to the people that

that is their mission to go do so that we are not

duplicating that.

I am not going to go chase the Chinese high-altitude

balloon, for example.   That is not my job.          It is not an

unknown and it is not anomalous anymore.           Now it goes over

to them.

Senator Ernst:    Very good.        Thank you, Madam Chair.

Senator Gillibrand:      Thank you.

I want to just follow up on the filters for

surveillance.   Outside observers have speculated that DOD

sets filters on certain sensors to eliminate objects that

are moving really fast or slow because what we are looking

for militarily are conventional aircraft and missiles.              UAP

that does not fit into these programs would thereby be

weeded out and never noticed.

This speculation was proven to be true during the UAP

incidents over North America where DOD publicly acknowledged


that we were able to start seeing these UAPs only when we

opened up these filters.

Obviously, our military operators cannot be overloaded

with objects that are not conventional aircraft or missiles.

Can you nonetheless make sure that the raw data is being

captured and subsequently processed so that your office

knows what is really out there and is that going to cost

money?    Will you expect to pay for that money out of AARO's

budget?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:    One of the key tenets that we are

trying to do in our science plan is understand what those

signatures are.    So we get all the raw, for example, radar

data prior to the scrubbing and filtering to allow it to

enter into our weapon systems and our detection systems.

We are now taking all that data and cross correlating

it to what pilots are saying they are seeing or other

observations from other operators.

What that allows us to do is then see if there are any

signatures in that data that I can pull out, generate what

we will call automatic target recognition algorithms that

allow us to then use that signature associated with a

observed UAP whatever that UAP may be.

We will then make those recommendations of what those

changes should be back to the department.    So the deputy

secretary had asked me last October to make those


recommendations, what changes do we need to make to radars,

to platforms, to detection systems and algorithms, to pull

on those algorithms and make those changes.       That is going

to take some time.

That is where the research and development comes in.

It is not -- it is not instantaneous.       Right now, a lot of

the -- I will not say a lot of the things that fall outside

of the ranges of those filters have been identified by

people in the loop and you cannot have people in the loop

all the time.   It is just not cost effective.

So part of our budget is working through what does that

look like and then making those recommendations back to the

big program offices for them to put into -- changes in

acquisition.

Senator Gillibrand:    My last question is about the

academic community.   Can you give us an update on sort of

how you collaborate with the academic community and whether

-- how the independent study being done by NASA complements

AARO's work?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   Sure.

Two questions so I will try to make it quick.        In 1979

Carl Sagan said extraordinary claims require extraordinary

evidence.   I would go one step further and I would say

extraordinary claims require not only extraordinary evidence

but extraordinary science and so how do you do that?


You do that with the scientific method.   So as AARO is

developing and implementing its science plan it has to do so

grounded in a solid foundation of scientific theory across

the entire range of hypotheses that have been presented for

what UAP are.

That range spans adversary breakthrough technology, on

one hand, known objects and phenomena in the middle, all the

way to the extreme theories of extraterrestrials.

All of that has physics-based signatures associated

with it, whether it is theoretical from the academic

community known from things like hypersonic weapons or

adversary breakthrough technologies, as we have talked about

before, or the known objects that we have to go measure.

The idea is across that entire range you have to come

up with peer-reviewed scientific basis for all of it.    The

academic community plays a very big role on the -- one end

of the spectrum, the intelligence community on the other end

of the spectrum, and then measurement in the middle.

Once I have those signatures identified in validated

peer-reviewed documents then I have something to point to

for all that data because all that data is going to match

one of those signatures, and then I can go, well, it is that

and not that or it is that, and that helps us go through all

that.

Where NASA comes in and the study that they are doing,


which I am supporting, is really looking at the unclassified

data sources that might be used to augment our classified

data sources to understand if there is a signature there we

can pull on.   So very similar to the radars but civil

capability.

For example, we have a lot of climate science

satellites, for example, that look at Earth.   Lots of them.

How many of those is the data valuable in seeing these

kinds of objects?   The challenge in that is those platforms

do not necessarily have the resolution you need.

If you remember the slide I put up there with the

trends, the size of the objects we are looking for are

typically reported to be one to four meters.

Well, the resolution of many of the climate science

civil satellites is much larger than that, which means you

would have a hard time picking out something that is smaller

than a pixel on the imagery on the data.

That is not to say all of it is not useful and there

are ways of pulling through that data and going through.

That is what NASA is focused on right now is what is -- what

are some other data sources that could be used.

In addition, things like open source and crowd sourcing

of data -- we are exploring public-private partnerships,

ma'am, as you know -- we have talked about it in the past --

to look at is there a way to smartly crowd source additional


data that might be useful to augment some of my classified

sources and what does that look like and how would we do it

so that we are not overwhelmed by everybody who wants to

take a picture of everything.

Senator Gillibrand:    Thank you.

Is there anything -- is there anything else you would

like to tell the committee before we close?

Or do you have another round?

Senator Ernst:   No.

Senator Gillibrand:    Yeah.      Do you have anything else

you would like to tell the committee before we close?

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   Thank you very much for allowing us

to come and share a little bit of insight into what AARO is

up to and what we are doing.

I hope to be able to share a whole lot more in the

future.   We have a lot of work to do.            So if you do not hear

from me outside it is because we have got a lot of work to

do.

Senator Gillibrand:    Thank you so much, Dr.

Kirkpatrick.   Thank you for the hearing.

Mr. Kirkpatrick:   Thank you.

Audience Member:   Excuse me.           I drove 600 miles to come

here.   I -- and I presented a book to David Spergel, who I

know is associated with the gentleman here.             But I do not

have flying saucers.     We just saw the first one.          They had


no explanation for it.    I would like to provide the evidence

for it.   It is on my video, as well as ancient evidence of

cave drawings that look identical to that disc.

And what that would tell us is what [inaudible] and the

corporal has been saying.      Assuming that they are coming

here is the assumption.     A terrible thing to do.      If we can

prove that they have always existed then they are not

changing in model, size, appearance, then it would answer

the question of these people in the sky have always

[inaudible].

But I have had to struggle trying to get the evidence

we saved and I did contact Neil deGrasse Tyson and he

informed me with an email, which I put in my book and about

these crafts.   I find them and film them and send them to

everybody I can.

He told me to literally take them to the proper

authorities and that I could get my evidence looked at and

that is what I am doing today.         I drove all the way from

Ohio, Mr. Kirkpatrick.

Senator Gillibrand:     Dr. Kirkpatrick is the person --

the perfect person to give your evidence to --

Audience Member:    Yeah, I appreciate it.

Senator Gillibrand:     -- and eventually we will have a

website where you could just submit it and not have to go

600 miles.   Today, since you are here, please submit your


evidence to Dr. Kirkpatrick and if you have copies we will

take your copies.

Audience Member:   I have footage.      I have grown up in

Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Audience Member:   Same here.

Audience Member:   I have on my phone three different

examples of glowing dots flying in circles or going over

Sandia Labs and Kirkland Air Force Base.

Senator Gillibrand:   Yeah.      Yes.

Audience Member:   They have come down frequently and

consistently and loiter over our advanced weapons and

manufacturing industry, monitor it using advanced means like

the --

Senator Gillibrand:   Yeah.      We are very interested in

that data.

Audience Member:   The vehicles tend to be about 10

meters in size and the data that Dr. Kirkpatrick gave about

the signatures of one to three gigahertz is the propulsion

field interacting with the atmospheric water -- the water in

the atmosphere.

The higher gigahertz range comes from the effects of

the propulsion field reducing the initial mass of the craft

so they can do these outstanding maneuvers of [inaudible]

degrees or rotating and flying off at hypersonic velocity.

There is knowledge within the weapons industry.       More


people need to come forward.     We need to pull up engineers

out of Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, and allow them the freedom

to speak and stop the secrecy.       Thank you for hearing me.

Senator Gillibrand:    My office can be a clearinghouse

for this information.

Audience Member:    Yes, Ms. Gillibrand.       I have got

video of it.

Senator Gillibrand:    If you want to submit to me the

names and the people that you want Dr. Kirkpatrick has

contacts.   I can do that, and any video that you want to

give us, eventually we will have a platform so this can be

done automatically.   But I could [inaudible] and give it to

Dr. Kirkpatrick.   If you have it on a DVD --

Audience Member:    I want to thank you.

Senator Gillibrand:    -- to get it to him directly.

Audience Member:    I am a Marine so my hearing is a

little blunt.   So if I could leave this with you --

Senator Gillibrand:    Yes.

Audience Member:    -- and somebody can give it to Dr.

Kirkpatrick would be great.

Senator Gillibrand:    Yes.

Audience Member:    That is my whole point.       I just leave

it on this desk?

Senator Gillibrand:    Yeah.      Yeah.   I will take it --

Audience Member:    I appreciate it.       Thank you so much


for looking into it.

Senator Gillibrand:   Do you have a card?      We have to

give our business cards to the chair.      The first draft and

then [inaudible] are you done with it?

Staff:   Sure.

Senator Gillibrand:   Yeah.      Why don't you take it since

you are actually going to -- I am going to give it to Dr.

Kirkpatrick and then [inaudible].

[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
