                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                              FREEDOM OF INFORMATION DIVISION
                                   1155 DEFENSE PENTAGON
                                 WASHINGTON, DC 20301-1155


                                                                                 Ref: 24-F-0266
                                                                                 March 21, 2024

Mr. John Greenewald
The Black Vault, Inc.
27305 W. Live Oak Rd.
Suite #1203
Castaic, CA 91384

Dear Mr. Greenewald:

       This is a final response to your November 2, 2023 Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
request, a copy of which is enclosed for your convenience. We received your request on
November 2, 2023, and assigned it FOIA case number 24-F-0266. We ask that you use this
number when referring to your request.

        The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence & Security, a component of the Office
of the Secretary of Defense, conducted a search of their records systems and located 26 pages
determined to be responsive to your request. Mr. Paul Plescow, Senior Intelligence Officer, in
his capacity as an Initial Denial Authority, has determined that portions of the 26 responsive
pages are exempt from release pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 552 (b)(6), information which, if disclosed,
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of the personal privacy of individuals; and
(b)(7)(E), which would disclose techniques and procedures for law enforcement investigations or
prosecutions, or would disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions if
such disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of law. Please note that we
have considered the foreseeable harm standard when reviewing records and applying exemptions
under the FOIA in the processing of this request.

      In this instance, fees for processing your request were below the threshold for requiring
payment. Please note that fees may be assessed on future requests.

       If you have any questions or concerns about the foregoing or about the processing of your
request, please do not hesitate to contact the Action Officer assigned to your request, Brianna
Johnson, at brianna.n.johnson2.civ@mail.mil or 571-372-0409. Additionally, if you have
concerns about service received by our office, please contact a member of our Leadership Team
at 571-372-0498 or Toll Free at 866-574-4970.

       Should you wish to inquire about mediation services, you may contact the OSD/JS FOIA
Public Liaison, Toni Fuentes, at 571-372-0462, or by email at OSD.FOIALiaison@mail.mil. You
may also contact the Office of Government Information Services (OGIS) at the National Archives
and Records Administration to inquire about the FOIA mediation services they offer. The contact
information for OGIS is as follows:
                             Office of Government Information Services
                             National Archives and Records Administration
                             8601 Adelphi Road-OGIS
                             College Park, MD 20740
                             E-mail: ogis@nara.gov
                             Telephone: 202-741-5770
                             Fax: 202-741-5769
                             Toll-free: 1-877-684-6448

       You have the right to appeal to the appellate authority, Ms. Joo Chung, Assistant to the
Secretary of Defense for Privacy, Civil Liberties, and Transparency (PCLT), Office of the
Secretary of Defense, at the following address: 4800 Mark Center Drive, ATTN: PCLFD, FOIA
Appeals, Mailbox #24, Alexandria, VA 22350-1700.

       Your appeal must be postmarked within 90 calendar days of the date of this response.
Alternatively, you may email your appeal to osd.foia-appeal@mail.mil. If you use email, please
include the words "FOIA Appeal" in the subject of the email. Please also reference FOIA case
number 24-F-0266 in any appeal correspondence.

        We appreciate your patience in the processing of your request. As stated previously,
please contact the Action Officer assigned to your request, Brianna Johnson, and reference FOIA
case number 24-F-0266, if you have any questions or concerns.

                                                   Sincerely,




                                                   Stephanie L. Carr
                                                   Chief


Enclosures:
As stated
  sdoc
Thi   umenti
           smadeavail
                    abl
                      ethrought
                              hedeclassi
                                       fi
                                        cat
                                          ionef
                                              for
                                                ts
       andr
          esear
              chofJohnGreenewal
                              d,Jr
                                 .,cr
                                    eatorof
                                          :


  T
  heB
    lac
      kVa
        ult
     TheBlackVaultist
                    helargestonlneFr
                                i   eedom ofI
                                            nfor
                                               mationAct(FOIA)
      documentcl
               ear i
                   nghouseintheworld.Theresearcheff
                                                  ort
                                                    shereare
     responsi
            blef
               orthedec l
                        assi
                           fi
                            cati
                               onofhundredsofthousandsofpages
               releasedbytheU. S.Government&Mi l
                                               it
                                                ary
                                                  .


          scovert
         Di     heTr
                   uthat
                       :ht
                         t /
                          p:/
                            www.
                               thebl
                                   ackvaul
                                         t.com
                                                                          January 8th, 2024


MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

SUBJECT: All-domain Anomaly Resolution Office Invitations to Interview Mr. David Grusch

1. The All-domain Anomaly Resolution Office (AARO) extended multiple invitations to Mr.
David Grusch for the purpose of conducting an oral history interview in support of the
Congressionally directed Historical Record Report (HRR). Invitations, both direct and through
intermediaries, to interview Mr. Grusch regarding his claimed knowledge of U.S. Government
possession of extra-terrestrial material and reverse-engineering programs were met with negative
results.

2. The following attempts were made, by Director, AARO and staff, to encourage Mr. Grusch to
provide information to AARO, on the record, and in an appropriately secure environment. The
James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 authorizes AARO to
receive reporting about U.S. Government activities and events related to Unidentified
Anomalous Phenomena (UAP), regardless of classification level or compartmentalization of the
information.

A. Between June 8th, 2023 and June 13 th, 2023, Director, AARO en ed in a dialog with
Person (b)(6) regarding AARO's authorities and encouraged Perso (b)(6) o have Mr. Grusch
contact AAR . Note that Perso Ns)          s a known close associate o   sch and the dialog
made it clear that Person ( ))(6) was in contact with Mr. Grusch.

B. On June 12th and 13th, 2023, Director, AARO, discussed with a Professional Staff Member
(PSM) of the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Mr. Grusch's refusal to speak with
AARO. The PSM stated that he would contact Mr. Grusch and request Mr. Grusch's email
address. The PSM made the offer after the Director made it clear that AARO did not have Mr.
Grusch's contact information.

 C. On June 26th, 2023, AARO staff contacted Interviewee (b)(6)    d asked for Mr. Grusch's
 current telephone number so that an invitation could be exten• to Mr. Grusch. Interviewee
(b)(6)  contacted Mr. Grusch on AARO's behalf and an invitation was rebuffed by Mr. Grusch.

D. On June 28th, 2023, Director, AARO contacted a PSM with the U.S. Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence after Mr. Grusch's appearance before Congress and asked for any information,
reported to Congress by Mr. Grusch, that AARO may be able to verify. The Director also
reminded the PSM of the agreement that if a witness expressed apprehension about coming to
AARO, that AARO would send a staff member to Congressional spaces to record the
information into the U.S. Government record in support of the HRR.

E. On July 27th, 2023, AARO staff conducted an interview of Interviewee (b)(6) 'who revealed
that he would be having dinner with Mr. Grusch the following day. AARO staff, to include the
Director, asked Interviewee (b)(6) to invite Mr. Grusch to contact AARO for an interview.
AARO staff made it clear that the interview would be conducted in a secure facility, in
accordance with the law, and the tone of the interview would be friendly and non-
confrontational, as are all AARO interviews.

F. On October 6th, 2023, AARO staff conducted a secure call and interview with Interviewee
(b)(6)land asked that he also encourage Mr. Grusch to agree to a secure interview so that Mr.
Grusch's cl. is ii ight be introduced into the U.S. Government record in support of the HRR.
            (b)()
               6
Interviewee         s known to be a close associate of Mr. Grusch.

G. During the previous several months, Director, AARO, asked a PSM with the U.S. Senate
Committee on Armed Services to encourage Mr. Grusch to provide information to AARO during
an official interview.

H. On November 10th, 2023, Mr. Grusch contacted AARO, at the urging of Congressional Staff
Members, and agreed to be interviewed in Arlington, VA on November 141h, 2024. AARO
provided Mr. Grusch with a memorandum from the Director of Special Access Programs,
Department of Defense that made it clear AARO is authorized to receive compartmented
information (Enclosure 1). Mr. Grusch was also told that AARO would obtain a similar
memorandum from the Director, Controlled Access Programs Office, Office of the Director of
National Intelligence.

I. On November 14th, 2023, Mr. Grusch failed to show at the agreed upon location and time for
an interview with AARO. Upon contacting Mr. Grusch, he stated that he is not convinced that
AARO is authorized to receive varying levels of classified and sensitive information.

J. On November 19th, 2023, AARO, again contacted Mr. Grusch via email and stated, "We invite
you to speak to AARO regarding any U.S. government programs or activities related to
unidentified anomalous phenomena (UAP) dating back to 1945. In accordance with the James
M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023, AARO is authorized to
receive any information related to UAP regardless of classification, and notwithstanding any
nondisclosure agreement you may have signed. We would be glad to meet with you in a SCIF so
that you could share information with us." This specific invitation was coordinated with the
Office of General Counsel, Department of Defense. Mr. Grusch, again, declined the invitation
despite previously agreeing to an interview. And, again, Mr. Grusch cited various security
concerns that AARO is authorized to receive information of any classification level regarding
UAP.

K. On January 8th, 2024, AARO provided Mr. Grusch with a memorandum from the Director,
Controlled Access Programs Office, Office of the Director of National Intelligence that states
AARO is authorized to receive information which is subject to a U.S. Government
Nondisclosure Agreement (Enclosure 2). AARO also informed Mr. Grusch that there is a
standing invitation to be interviewed by AARO regarding his claims of UAP and U.S.
Government activity and events.

3. During interactions between AARO and Mr. Grusch from November 2023 to January 2024, it
became evident that Mr. Grusch had no intention of providing AARO with information regarding
his claims. This assessment stands despite the NDAA for FY 2023 and the enclosed
memorandums from the Department of Defense and the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence making it clear that AAR° is authorized to receive all levels of information related
to IJAP.

                                                    (b)(6)




Enclosures:
As stated
                                                                                                                       T•    60% Mi

     Chris Mellon                                                                                                                   t.
Thanks

                                                                       ,



      Grusch has made claims that he's contacted us and we've never responded. That's just not true. He's also made
      claims that we don't have access to investigate his claims. That's also not true. If I recall correctly you indicated he
      refused to come talk with us, and you're quoted as suggesting as such. I'd suggest you emphasize the need to come
      speak with us. You have the contact email

                                                            Ti', „hot 13


Hi Sean: Do you have a specific example of Dave claiming he's contacted AARO and your office refused to respond?
That sounds strange as during a conversation yesterday he told me AARO was not a lawfuly designated recipient of
his whistlebiower info, hence his reason for not contacting AARO. I also do not recall saying Dave refused to come
talk to AARO, I certainly did not do so in the Debrief article or my article in Politico and I've done no interviews yet
about Dave.

                               It was on the interview Sunday. Pentagon is preparing a response.

                               His assertion that we aren't lawfully empowered is clearly incongruous with the law.     640 AM 40


I'll be happy to check on that. Contrary to press reports Dave still retains his attorney who is a former NSA and IC IG.
Chuck should know if anyone does.

      There is a significant misconception between the authorities in question. The title 50 authorities we done have are for
      Cl purposes, not taking in information. The law is very clear about that and if he has a concern ho should have his
      attorney discuss with OGC. We've have many people come share appropriately the information they have from
      various places. Chuck is wrong if that's his advice.                                                                 010


I'll be happy to raise w Dave and get book to you. al,. AAA

                                     If nothing else he needs to contact us and we'll introduce his attorney to OGC.    8:157 AAA


I'll reach out to him today. .-,   At;


I spoke w Dave and his first question was, Why hadn't AARO gotten all the info from the IC IC? It is all there and fuly
documented to include confirmation the program is real from active, cleared insiders.                                A..1


                                                                                                                            Cal
                                     • • •




     Chris Mellon @

I spoke w Dave and his first question was, "Why hadn't , Two, Jun 13 all the info from the IC IG? It is all there and fully
documented to include confirmation the program is real from active, Cleared insiders.                               ,

                                                                 DOJ has to release it since it's part of a criminal investigation.

                                                                                                                 They haven't yet

                                                     He needs to come tell us separate from his criminal complaint              (0

He obviously doesn't have to do so and he even said "How do I know Sean is not a target of the ongoing criminal
investigation (I) However, that being said, I
explained your request regarding having his attorney contact OGC and suggested he do so to show full cooperation.
He said that if you can provide OGC's contact info he'll pass it to his attorney. Btw, he also said his claim about
contacting you dates to a conversation the two of you had many months ago on a 'Tandberg* (sp?) system and that
you didn't follow up after that call. I'm not trying to adjudicate that issue just telling you what he said. Apparently that
is what his statement was referring to. So, if you can provide an OGC email or phone number I'll get that to Dave right
away and hopefully his attorney will promptly contact OGC.

           All of that is both absurd and false. I have had a conversation with him for years. If he wants this brought out and
           investigated, then yes he obviously does have to. His continued refusal to speak with us only hurts his case.

                                                                        I've contacted Congressional OGC to reach out to him.

                                                                                                     So they can explain the law.

                                                                                           Haven't had a conversation for years

                                                Our statement will simply be that he's refused to speak with AARO               oso

OK, sounds good. Happy to help when I can. Don't hesitate to kick my tires if I'm off base on something

Btw, there isn't a Congressional OGC as such. Tx, if

                                                                       There are congressional lawyers that get law

To be clear, whom should Dave expect to hear from if you cannot provide a POC at DoD?

                                                                                                              Vet law             /


                                                                                                                    rel
    Chris Mellon @

                                                                  Tu.,, Jun 13                                       Vet law    m 1,r AM   go

Hill OGC generally advise members only,

They advise their employers, not members of the public

                                           It's either a lawyer at the Hill or a lawyer in DoD. Who am I sending them to?

                                           Either the law is law or we can scrub having anyone else come see AARO. lo 20 AV

You can't tell Chuck to go to various committees on the Hill. It needs to be someone who represents AARO in the
Executive Branch.

There are a dozen Hill committees with Majority and Minority counsel who may not even agree.

                                      Depends on how badly people want this sorted. Send me chuck's contact info.                    A,1 ato



Not without his permission obviously. How about I relay your contact info here to Chuck?

This will get sorted, of that I have no doubt. It is only a matter of how quickly and by whom.

               I'm not giving my contact info out. Given the hititeletReint end,threate„ illettxityme,hir a secure mechanism.
                                                           - NO

           Chris Mellon
           He obviously doesn't have to do so and he oven said 'How do I know Sean is not a target of the ongoing criminal investigation'
           (!) However, that being said, I ,.
      I

          And yes, you are defending and adjudicating, and you're undermining the very organization you purported to help
          establish for this purpose.                                                                             10 45



Really? Odd, I try to bring everyone to AARO I can; I am trying to help put Dave in touch with your GC if you can
provide simple contact info; I'm not judging the claims between you and Dave and have not claimed his claims are
accurate, I've said he is sincere and credible and his and other claims, which I expressly called "allegations,"warrant
investigation. I have no idea what u or Dave discussed or when and I'm not taking a position on that or even the
underlying claim of recovered materials. So I'm kind...
Read More

Dave can now sa 'Sean has refused to • rovide me or                attorne the contact information that would allow us to

     Messacr                                                                                                               IP
                                                                                                                            S'`         414% Mi


    Chris Mellon                                                                                                                             t.
              I'm not giving my contact info out Given the howootiimont and threats. That's why we have a secure mechanism.
                                                               Tuo. Jun 13

         Chris Mellon
         He obviously doesn't have to do so and ho oven said 'How do I know Sean is not a target of the ongoing criminal investigation
         (!) However, that being said, L.

         And yes, you are defending and adjudicating, and you're undermining the very organization you purported to help
         establish for this purpose                                                                                  Ay



Really? Odd, I try to bring everyone to AARO I can; I am trying to help put Dave in touch with your GC if you can
provide simple contact info; I'm not judging the claims between you and Dave and have not claimed his claims are
accurate. I've said he is sincere and credible and his and other claims, which I expressly called "allegations:warrant
investigation. I have no idea what u or Dave discussed or when and I'm not taking a position on that or even the
underlying claim of recovered materials. So I'm kind...
Read More

Dave can now say, "Sean has refused to provide me or my attorney the contact information that would allow us to
discuss legal concerns we have with providing testimony to AARO." I an not your enemy and I am not saying this to
provoke or irritate you; moreover having once been in similar jobs I recognize you have a big pile of work and
responsibility on your plate. I only mention this because it seems you must have some legal representation and
assuming they are competent it seems to me a discussion it would help to get Dave's testimony into your system.

That it seems to me should be a win for all.

                                                                                        I've asked OGC for contact info.          7     pv

Great!

                                                                                                    Waiting to hear back.

I will be happy to provide that to Dave and Chuck it you like. I think you have a fascinating and important lob and I
want nothing more than to see the process work. Please don't think I am out to make your Job harder.             15 PM



                           Actually, Dave can't say any such thing since he hasn't asked me for anything. Only you.               , ,        ao

Actually, he probably can and might! But that doesn't matter, I have no specific reason to believe he will and lam not
proposing that to him. Just trying to close the loop and move things toward a good outcome. Thanks.              7111PM




                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                            100', MB

CI%
      Chris Mellon
                                                                                                                                t.
                                                                            1,3
                                                                                          I've asked OGC for contact info

Great!

                                                                                                    Waiting to hear back.       CO


I will be happy to provide that to Dave and Chuck if you like. I think you have a fascinating and important job and I
want nothing more than to see the process work. Please don't think I am out to make your job harder.

                         Actually, Dave can't say any such thing since he hasn't asked me for anything. Only you.

Actually, he probably can and might! But that doesn't matter, I have no specific reason to believe he will arid I am not
proposing that to him. Just trying to close the loop and move things toward a good outcome. Thanks.

                                                              Yostarday


                                               You tot d,t3op4'mring melon+, time to 1 week



          This is official position of the Pentagon, released to media Tuesday, approved by OGC and the Secretary:

          'By law, AARO may receive all UAP-related information, including any classified national security information
          involving military, intelligence, and intelligence-related activities, at all levels of classification regardless of any
          restrictive access controls, special access programs, or compartmented access programs. Moreover, there is no
          restriction to AARO receiving any past or present UAP-related in...
          Read More


                                                                Totl or,r



                                                           Now Messages


I've passed that along to Dave for his attorney's review. Per your message above I'll seek to avoid further
communication unless it is something that seems extraordinarily urgent or you initiate.

Well OK! I'll get that off to Dave and his attorney this morning. Thanks.



                                                                                                                      IP
10:20                                       5G MI
  (b)(6)




                    Mon, Jun 26
           Do you                  number and/or
           email for David Grusch? Iwould like
           to invite him in for an interview.
                                       8:10 PM (0


Yeah, but let me ask him first. He has
bad blood with Sean going back to
2015.I'lltell him that only you want to
talk to him.                     11:15 PM


                  Sounds like a plan. Thank you
                                      11.45 PM WI
10:21
 (b)(6)




                     Tue, Jun 27
Dang it! Dave will only say chat Sean
knows how to contact him.        02

There really is bad blood with Sean
from Dave's perspective.      5:46 PM



          Interesting response. Well, thanks for
          checking       Much appreciated.
                                       7:25 PM 051
                                                                                                                            1.   84% im
(b)(6)




                                                                 Mon, Jun 12


              Grusch has made claims that he's contacted us and we've never responded. That's just not true. He's also made
              claims that we don't have access to investigate his claims. That's also not true. If I recall correctly you indicated he
              refused to come talk with us. I'd suggest you emphasize the need to come speak with us given his false statements
              and assertions.                                                                                                       %'


                                                                 The, Jun 13


   I will. But why don't you call or text him?    6:1



             I don't have contact info and I can only contact through the secure mechanism. So I'll need an email. Further Mellon
             is stating that he spoke with him and Grusch states that AARO is not a lawfully empowered org to receive his info.
                                                                                                                         212 „/ es,



   SMH...

   I'll reach out and try to reach Grusch this week

   As well as requesting an email
(b)(7)(E)


                                                                                                   (b)UXE)




   It's really a perfect example for why we need AARO
 p)(6) (b)(7)(E)


   Headed in SCIF


                     Well, if Grusch's lawyer successfully makes the case that we aren't lawfully empowered, there will be a lot less
                     appetite to keep AARO.

                   (b)(7)(E)
                                                                                                                             9:31 AM

 b)(7)(E)



            Message                                                                                                     9
                                                                                                                              86%
(b)(6)




                                                             Wed, Jun 28


                                                                                     Hey. What is Rubio talking about?    8 13pm 00



 He's referring to previous witnesses that provided testimony regarding the C/R program. Those witnesses will not go
 to AARO.... They were asked to


                                                                                         Do we have notes from their testimony?

                                                                                                       Are their program names?

                                                                                                                          Owners?

                                                                                                 Anything I can verify?              , (0


 I can review when back in office. On vacation a few more days.

 definitely a few program names

                                                              Fri, Jul 21


 Great job on the interview! Glad they allowed it to happen


                                                                              Thanks.

                                                                              Still need those alleged program names. c           r,,,1



 I'll talk to leadership and get back. 7 03


                                                                 CN was sent over yesterday with one of my findings.      7 )4 F          CO

         The agreement, as I recall, was if someone came to you all, we would be invited to participate so I can document and
         investigate. That hasn't happened, yet I've had you all over to participate. As it stands, Congress is not enabling us to
         actually do the job set in law for us to do and is withholding information from the office Congress set up.

         Raises a lot of questions.                                                                                        1 -j           fon



 Since you started interviewing we've had no one we didn't send your way so that's just not true

         Message                                                                                                    (;)
                                   (b)(6)
From:                David Grusch
Sent:                Monday. lant an/ 8.10141:44 PM
                     (b)(6)
To:
Subject:             Re: Contact Request



Good Afternoon,

Thank you will review. Please address my specific concerns that I sent via email on 19 Nov 23.

DG

                                (b)(6)
On Mon. Jan 8. 2024. 12:27 PM
(b)(6)
                                   Nrote:

 Mr. Grusch,




 During our conversation on November 10th, 2023, we discussed your comfort level with relaying sensitive information
 to AARO and the possibility of AARO obtaining a memo from CAPCO that clearly states that AARO can receive CAP
 information (similar to the SAPCO memo I provided you). Attached is that memo from the ODNI CAPCO.




 Again, I want to reiterate that in accordance with the James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
 Year 2023, AARO is authorized to receive any information related to UAP regardless of classification, and
 notwithstanding any nondisclosure agreement you may have signed.




 Our invitation to discuss possible U.S. Government programs, events, or activities related to UAP still stands.




 Have a good afternoon,




 (b)(6)




                     (b)(6)
 From: David Grusch
 Sent: Sunday, Novem er 19, 2023 6:03 PM
     (b)(6)
 To:
 Subject: Re: Contact Request


                                                             1
Good Evening,




Thank you for your email. I had expressed specific concerns, both directly via email and through counsel, and those
specific concerns have not yet been addressed in writing. Please reference those emails in this chain.




DG




                                (b)(6)
On Sun. Nov 19, 2023. 4:16 PM
(b)(6)
                                   wrote:

 Mr. Grusch,




                 We invite you to speak to AARO regarding any U.S. government programs or activities
                 related to unidentified anomalous phenomena (UAP) dating back to 1945. In
                 accordance with the James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
                 Year 2023, AARO is authorized to receive any information related to UAP regardless of
                 classification, and notwithstanding any nondisclosure agreement you may have
                 signed. We would be glad to meet with you in a SCIF so that you could share
                 information with us.

 (b)(6)



 AARO




                     (b6)
 From: David Grusch )(
 Sent: Tuesday. November 14. 2023 4:35:36 PM
     (b)(6)
 To:
 (b)(6)

 Subject: Re: Contact Request




 Thank you. I apologize for the confusion this morning about my whereabouts. I should been more clear in my email on
 Monday.




 DG



                                                          2
                                (b)(6)
On Tue, Nov 14, 2023, 3:37 PM
 x6)
p                                  wrote:

 Mr. Grusch,




 We received your email and we will get back to you shortly.




r6)




                      (b)(6)
 From: David Grusch
Sent: Tuesday. Novem oer 14 2023 10.36 AM
      (b)(6)
To
 (b)(6)

Subject: Re: Contact Request




AARO Staff,




 With due respect, I will need answers to my questions before I will be comfortable meeting. Please provide
 responses so that we can hopefully move forward and schedule a meeting.




The law may grant your office need-to-know, but does not establish policies and procedures with various data
owners. I have managed multi-compartmented activities throughout my entire career and have multiple DCSA
security professional certifications. I did not ask these questions for mere curiosity.




 DG




                                                         3
                                d (b)(6)
On Tue. Nov 14. 2023. 5:37 A
(b)(6)
                                      wrote:

  Mr. Grusch,




  The law is clear in that we can receive information at all classification levels.




  We can discuss when you come in.

   -
  From: David Grusch1Tb)(6)
         : Monday. November 13. 2023 12:24:06 PM
 ST(b)(6)
 (b)(6)

  Subject: Re: Contact Request




                  (b)(6)
  Good Morning




  Thank you for sending these items. As a former agency-level SAPMO and CAPCO I take security policies very
  seriously. In the DoD SAPCO memo, the term "UAP-related" is not defined. FY23 NDAA Sec. 1673 Subsection B
  defines it as the following:




 "any activity or program by a department or agency of the Federal Government or a contractor of
 such a department or agency relating to unidentified anomalous phenomena, including with respect
 to material retrieval, material analysis, reverse engineering, research and development,
 detection and tracking, developmental or operational testing, and security protections and
 enforcement."




  The key issue here is that many of these activities have conventional classified and compartmented Security
  Classification Guides that also cover non-UAP activities as well. To discuss the UAP-related activities would also
  expose these conventional SAP mission areas. An oral history interview subject must also be absolved of this
  obligation to protect this information as well, some of it may be bigoted or WAIVED (lAW DODI 5205.11 and 10 USC
  Sec 119).




  Furthermore, as discussed Friday, I am seeking a ODNI CAPCO determination to absolve an oral history interview
  subject of any NDA's relating to UAP-related and adjacent (as stated above) IC CAP information. Additionally, in my
  particular case, in order to horizontally protect a portion of my oral history testimony previously provided to ICIG
  and the intelligence committees, we would need to conduct the interview at the HCS-Operations (0) Restricted
                                                             4
    Handling (RH) level (lAW DNI CAPCO manual Sec. 4). Has the CIA Office of Security (OS) or Directorate of Operations
    (DO) provided a memo in this regard for oral history interview subjects? Has the OS provided a memo to also cover
    managed-need-to-know (MNTK) projects not directly reported to ODNI CAPCO?




    Lastly, what signed policy does AARO have to receive non-title-10 SAPs (ie, DOE and NSC)? Has the EOP NSC Security
    Director, Director National Program Management Staff OUSD(I&S), or DOE SAPCO/SAPOC provided a memo similar
    to the DoD SAPCO memo you provided?




    v/r,

    DG




                                          (b)(6)
    On Mon Nov 13. 2023 at 8:13 AM
    (b)(6)
                                                   wrote:

1     Mr. Grusch,



1
     Attached are the two items we spoke about:




             •   The Verbal Legal Advisement that we review prior to the start of every interview.




             •   The MFR from SAPCO that makes it clear that AARO can receive compartmented information from
                 interviewees.




                       (b)(6)
     Our address is                                         I will meet you in the lobby.




     See you tomorrow at 1000,



    (b)(6)


i
                                                                5
                        (b)(6)
  From: David Grusch
I Sent: Friday. November 10. 2023 11:05 AM
      (b)(6)
  To:
  Cc: (b)(6)
 (b)(6)

 Subject: Contact Request




 Good Morning,




               (b)(6)
 This is for                for coordination purposes.




                                                               (b)(6)
 Please give me a call to discuss conditions and admin items




 V/r,

 David Grusch




                                                         6
                                                                  (b)(6)
From: Kirkpatrick, Sean M HOE OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)
Sent: Wednesday, November 15, 2023 10:05 AM
To: (b)(6)
Subject: FW: Dave Grusch

For the records. Please save. Note the opening paragraph at the beginning of this email thread from (b)(6)

             (b)(6)
From:
Sent: Thursday, June 8, 2023 11:27 AM
                                                        (b)(6)
To: Kirknatrirk Sean M HOF OSO 011SO INTFI 1 SEC (USA)
(b)(6)
                                            Kozik, David A SES OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)
(b)(6)                         I
Lc:      (b)(6)

Subject: RE: Dave Grusch

You know how things work. He could have heard that a pgm is waived.

What do you mean by "you're free to ask"?

What UAP-related IG investigation are you referring to? The one on Grusch or the broader review?

                                                                  (b)(6)
From: Kirkpatrick, Sean M HOE OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)
Sent: Thursday, June 8, 2023 11:24 AM
To: (b)(6)
(b)(6)
                                 Kozik, David A SES OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)1 (b)(6)
(b)(6)

Subject: RE: Dave Grusch

He wouldn't know if it was waived if he "found" it, and as I said, I know what he was actually briefed to.

I've been told by the IG the UAP related investigation has been closed for a year — he is free to tell us, and you're free to
ask.

There is no excuse for not providing an authorized disclosure.

            (b)(6)
From:
Sent: Thursday, June 8, 2023 11:19 AM
    (b)(6)
To:                                                                  Kirkpatrick, Sean M HQE OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)

                                                              1
(b)(6)                                                                                 (b)(6)
                                     Kozik, David A SES OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA
(b)(6)

Subject: RE: Dave Grusch

He cannot tell SASC staff ANYTHING once he entered the IG process. We are forbidden from even asking. Furthermore,
if a waived SAP is involved, he cannot talk to SASC staff about it because we are not accessed.

         (b)(6)
From:
Sent: Thursday, June 8, 2023 7:50 AM
                                                            (b)(6)
To: Kirkpatrick. Sean M HOE OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA
(b)(6)
                                                           Kozik, David A SES OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)
(b)(6)
(b)(6)

Subject: RE: Dave Grusch

Tracking thanks Sean!

                                                                 (b)(6)
From: Kirkpatrick, Sean M HOE OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA
Sent: Wednesday, June 7, 2023 6:53 PM
    (b)(6)
To:                                                                                     Kozik, David A SES OSD OUSD
INTEL & SEC (USA) (b)(6)
(b)(6)

(b)(6)

Subject: Re: Dave Grusch

Let me expand a bit.

I know everything he was briefed to and had access to, and have far greater access. So he did not have access to some
DoD SAP that the IC didn't have (and if he did, he could've told you). Similarly, he didn't have access to some IC CAP that
couldn't be shared. If he "found" some program, he wouldn't know who's it was unless he had super user access or
someone who did helped him look it up. He didn't. Therefore, he can't make the argument that whatever he "found"
couldn't be shared. If he or others thought it was an illegal program, then again, he can't make the argument that it
couldn't be shared with either the DoD or the IC committees based on his assertion they didn't have clearances. It
sounds very much like playing the two halves against the middle to hide something.



          (b)(6)
From: '
Date: Wednesday, June 7, 2023 at 5:56:19 PM
                                                         (b)(6)
To: "Kirkpatrick, Sean M HOE 9SD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)"                                             Kozik, David A SES
OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)f 6
(b)(6)

(b)(6)
Subject: RE: Dave Grusch

Sean — press reports indicate that he said he could not provide everything he knows to the INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEES
because they were not cleared, so I concluded that he had access to some DOD SAP that the Intel Committee are not
accessed to — and inferred that the IC IG would not have access either.

                                                                 (b)(6)
From: Kirkpatrick, Sean M HOE OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)
Sent: Wednesday, June 7, 2023 5:50 PM
To (b)(6)                                                                               Kozik, David A SES OSD OUSD

                                                             2
                    (b)(6)
 INTEL & SEC USA
 (b)(6)

I (b)(6)

 Subject: Re: Dave Grusch

 All-I did speak with the DoDIG. They went on my behalf to the ICIG to request the classified transcript. Why? Because
 Grusch gave NOTHING to the DoDIG and claimed the same thing he told you - that it was IC compartmented information
 and they couldn't have it.

 The ICIG declined to acquiesce to my request.

 I am fairly confident I know what compartments he is referring to, because I did my job, but I cannot confirm 100% if he
 doesn't come see me.

 As DK points out, the SSCI could give me the transcript.

 Sean



           (b)(6)
 From:
 Date: Wednesday, June 7, 2023 at 5:41:46 PM
                                                    (b)(6)
 To: "Kozik, David A SES Op OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)"                                    "Kirkpatrick, Sean M HOE OSD
 OUSD INTFI g SFC (I ISA) l I (" 6)
     (b)(6)
 Cc
 (b)(6)

 Subject: RE: Dave Grusch

 Really helpful, Dave, thanks. Did not know that executive branch folks are in the same boat we are. Will urge Grusch to
 come through Sean's portal.

                                                            (b)(6)
 From: Kozik, David A SES OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)
 Sent: Wednesday, June 7, 2023 5:36 PM
 TO: (b)(6)                                                                             Kirkpatrick, Sean M HOE OSD
 OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA) (b)(6)
 (b)(6)

 (b)(6)

 Subject: Re: Dave Grusch

 Weighing in— there's no way in heck that DoD and IC IG will give any third party raw information, ever. IG investigations
 are a black box for a reason. The best Sean will get from them is a filtered report that the IG releases to everyone.

 Bottom line: best COA is still for Mr. Grusch to speak to AARO per their confidential process (the one Congress directed
 in law). If he doesn't,
 I fear the best assessment you will ever get from AARO is a reflection of a reflection. FYI, Sean won't have an access
 problem, ie he has no SAP/CAP restrictions— it's just the IG divide.

 Of course, if he did speak to the intel committees, they could always provide their transcripts/notes to Sean for his
 review.

 My two cents.

 VR
                                                                     3
DK




         (b)(6)
From:
Date: Wednesday, June 7, 2023 at 10:24:52 PM
To: "Kirkpatrick, Sean M HQE OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)" (b)(6)                                 'Kozik, David A SES
OSD OUSD INTEL & SEC (USA)" (b)(6)
(b)(6)

(b)(6)

Subject: Dave Grusch


Sean: Grusch confirmed to me that he does not intend to avail himself of the AARO "Safe harbor" process to tell you
what he spent many hours telling the DoD IG, the IC IG, and the two intelligence committees about UAP. He has
reported through the media in recent days that he was not able to share some of the information he has with the two
intelligence committees because they lacked the program accesses. Assuming accurate media reporting, that means
that he has told either/both DoD/IC IGs about one or more SAPs that the Intel Committees are not accessed to. The
Armed Services Committees are not allowed by process rules to interview Grusch about any of this because the IC
whistleblower process is tightly controlled by the Intel Committees.

What this means is that the DoD/IC IGs know something from Grusch that Congress as a whole is not aware of. That is a
reason for you to go to the IGs and ask for access, as they deem appropriate, for you to what Grusch is reporting. If
waived programs are involved, there would need to be a way for you to convey this to our staff directors. But there is
also just a basic reason for you to try to get all the information that Grusch has provided to the IGs.




                                                           4
                        (b)(6)
From:
Sent:                   Tuesday, November 14, 2023 10:34 AM
To:                     David Grusch
Subject:                Re: Contact Request



I've been waiting in the lobby over 30 minutes. Are you showing up?

From: David Grusch (b)(6)
Sent: Monday, November 13, 2023 12:24:06 PM
TO: (" 6)
Subject: Re: Contact Request

               (b)(6)
Good Morning

Thank you for sending these items. As a former agency-level SAPMO and CAPCO I take security policies very seriously. In
the DoD SAPCO memo, the term "UAP-related" is not defined. FY23 NDAA Sec. 1673 Subsection B defines it as the
following:

"any activity or program by a department or agency of the Federal Government or a contractor of
such a department or agency relating to unidentified anomalous phenomena, including with respect to
material retrieval, material analysis, reverse engineering, research and development, detection and
tracking, developmental or operational testing, and security protections and enforcement."

The key issue here is that many of these activities have conventional classified and compartmented Security
Classification Guides that also cover non-UAP activities as well. To discuss the UAP-related activities would also expose
these conventional SAP mission areas. An oral history interview subject must also be absolved of this obligation to
protect this information as well, some of it may be bigoted or WAIVED (lAW DODI 5205.11 and 10 USC Sec 119).

Furthermore, as discussed Friday, I am seeking a ODNI CAPCO determination to absolve an oral history interview subject
of any NDA's relating to UAP-related and adjacent (as stated above) IC CAP information. Additionally, in my particular
case, in order to horizontally protect a portion of my oral history testimony previously provided to ICIG and the
intelligence committees, we would need to conduct the interview at the HCS-Operations (0) Restricted Handling (RH)
level (lAW DNI CAPCO manual Sec. 4). Has the CIA Office of Security (OS) or Directorate of Operations (DO) provided a
memo in this regard for oral history interview subjects? Has the OS provided a memo to also cover managed-need-to-
know (MNTK) projects not directly reported to ODNI CAPCO?

Lastly, what signed policy does AARO have to receive non-title-10 SAPs (ie, DOE and NSC)? Has the EOP NSC Security
Director, Director National Program Management Staff OUSD(I&S), or DOE SAPCO/SAPOC provided a memo similar to
the DoD SAPCO memo you provided?

v/r,
DG




                                    (b)(6)
On Mon, Nov 13, 2023 at 8:13 AM
(b)(6)
                                    vrote:

 Mr. Grusch,

                                                              1
Attached are the two items we spoke about:




       •   The Verbal Legal Advisement that we review prior to the start of every interview.




       •   The MFR from SAPCO that makes it clear that AARO can receive compartmented information from interviewees.




                      (b)(6)
Our address is                                                  I will meet you in the lobby.




See you tomorrow at 1000,




(b)(6)




                               (b)(6)
From: David Grusch
Seat: Friday. November 10. 202                11:05 AM
     (b)(6)
To                                        t
CC: (b)(6)
Subject: Contact Request




Good Morning,




This is for (13)(6)                for coordination purposes.



                                                                            (b)(6)
Please give me a call to discuss conditions and admin items:




V/r,

David Grusch



                                                                        2
                                        UNCLASSIFIED

                 OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
                                         WASHINGTON, DC


                                                                                  CAPC0-23-003

 SUBJECT: Authorization to Provide Information to Personnel Representing the All-Domain
          Anomaly Resolution Office (AARO), Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
          Intelligence and Security (OUSD(I&S))

 REFERENCE: Section 1673 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023


 Representatives of the All.Domain Anomaly Resolution Office (AARO) are authorized to speak
 to persons and/or conduct interviews of persons that currently have, or previously had, access to
 sensitive U.S. Government (USG) information, activities, and/or materials.

Individuals with current or previous access to Unidentified Aerial Phenomena (LJAP)-related or
presumed relevant information which is subject to a USG Nondisclosure Agreement are
authorized to provide this otherwise protected information to AARO representatives. AARO
personnel are authorized to receive this information pursuant to Section 1673 of the National
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year (FY) 2023. The provision of -OAP-related
information which is subject to a Nondisclosure Agreement to AARO personnel constitutes an
authorized disclosure if the information is provided and received for the limited purpose of
conducting AARO's assigned mission as specified in Section 1683 of the NDAA for FY2022, as
amended by Section 6802 of the NDAA for FY2023.

AARO representatives will conduct any conversation, interview, or disclosure of USG sensitive
information by an individual only within appropriate secure spaces and handled in accordance
with the regulations applicable to the alleged classification level of the potentially sensitive
information discussed, (e.g., if the individual providing the information indicates that he/she
believes the information to be shared is classifiedZOMAGiarioTp440:i.or CAA, the AARO
representatives will handle the information in accordance with such level at intake and until the
classification can be determined).

Persons in contact with, or interviewed by. AARO representatives are advised that they are to
continue safeguarding classified and sensitive information in accordance with. U.S. law and the
terms of any applicable Nondisclosure Agreement. An individual's authorized disclosure of
sensitive information to AARO representatives are outlined in this memorandum in no way
impacts that individual's responsibility to protect and safeguard classified information from
unauthorized disclosure
 (b)(6)


(b)(6)
Director, Controlled Access Programs Central Office



                                        UNCLASSIFIED
                    OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
                                    3200 DEFENSE PENTAGON
                                   WASHINGTON, DC 20301-3200

                                                                                   MAR 08 2023

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

SUBJECT:       Authorization to Provide Information to Personnel Representing the All-Domain
               Anomaly Resolution Office (AARO), Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
               for Intelligence and Security (OUSD(I&S))
References:    Section 1673 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023

1.Representatives of the All-Domain Anomaly Resolution Office (AARO) are authorized to
speak to persons and/or conduct interviews of persons that currently have, or previously had,
access to sensitive U.S. Government (USG) information, activities, and/or materials.
2. Individuals with current or previous access to Unidentified Aerial Phenomena (UAP)-related
information which is subject to a USG Nondisclosure Agreement are authorized to provide this
otherwise protected information to AARO representatives. AARO personnel are authorized to
receive this information pursuant to Section 1673 of the National Defense Authorization Act
(NDAA) for Fiscal Year (FY) 2023. The provision of UAP-related information which is subject
to a Nondisclosure Agreement to AARO personnel constitutes an authorized disclosure if the
information is provided and received for the limited purpose of conducting AARO's assigned
mission as specified in Section 1683 of the NDAA for FY2022, as amended by Section 6802 of
the NDAA for FY2023.
3. AARO representatives will conduct any conversation, interview, or disclosure of USG
sensitive information by an individual only within appropriate secure spaces and handled in
accordance with the regulations applicable to the alleged classification level of the potentially
sensitive information discussed, (e.g., if the individual providing the information indicates that
he/she believes the information to be shared is classified TOP CECIlET, special access required,
the AARO representatives will handle the information in accordance with such a level at intake
and until the classification can be determined).
4. Persons in contact with, or interviewed by, AARO representatives are advised that they are to
continue safeguarding classified and sensitive information in accordance with U.S. law and the
terms of any applicable Nondisclosure Agreement. An individual's authorized disclosure of
sensitive information to AARO representatives as outlined in this memorandum in no way
impacts that individual's responsibility to protect and safeguard classified information from
unauthorized disclosure.




                                                     DAVID W. ABBA
                                                     Maj Gen, USAF
                                                     Director, DoD Special Access Program
                                                      Central Office
