Approved For Release 2000/08/10 : CIA-RDP96-00787R000100180001-3


[Page 1 — cover]

STANFORD RESEARCH INSTITUTE
MENLO PARK, CALIFORNIA

22 February 1973

ORD # 1416-73

TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM

A Progress Report on Contract Number 1471(S)73

Prepared by:

Dr. H.E. Puthoff
Mr. Russell Targ
Senior Research Physicist
Electronics and Bioengineering Laboratory


[Page 2]

I    FIELD MEASUREMENTS PROGRAM, TASKS 1, 2, AND 3

    A.    Introduction

        Following is a summary of work carried out under Field
Measurements Contract No. 1471(S)73, Tasks 1, 2, and 3. Tasks 1 and
2 cover a two-week field measurement program (14-28 August 1972) with
consultant Ingo Swann; Task 3 covers a nine-day field measurement
program within the time period 1 December 1972 to 15 January 1973
with consultant Uri Geller.

    B.    Background

        A program in biofield measurements was initiated in July 1972
with a preliminary experiment with Mr. Swann. In this work using
a shielded magnetometer, Mr. Swann apparently demonstrated an ability
to increase and decrease at will the magnetic field within a super-
conducting magnetic shield. This experiment made use of an existing
facility and we have confidence that Mr. Swann had no prior knowledge
of either the apparatus or of our intended experiment. The experimental
results were carefully scrutinized and were unlike any data previously
produced with this apparatus. That observation is summarized in
Proposal for Research SRI No. ISU 72-134 (Biofield Measurements Program)
in your possession. Based on that observation, Tasks 1 and 2 were
initiated to carry out further experimentation with Mr. Swann in the
field measurements area, and, later, Task 3 was added to carry out
similar experimentation with Mr. Geller.


[Page 3]

    C.    Protocol

        A rigid protocol for experimentation in the area of psycho-
energetic research has been instituted in order to carry out the
assigned tasks.

    1.    Because of the history of charlatanism in this area, one
of our basic operating assumptions has to be that we cannot exclude
the possibility that a subject will hoax if given an opportunity. To
handle this, we consider it important to design experiments  a) which
are totally under the design and control of the experimenter rather
than the subject, and  b) which are considered in their basic design
to be cheatproof. Specifically, if in the performance of an experiment
or in the evaluation afterwards it is found that the results could
in principle be duplicated by cheating or stage magic, then that
experiment is to be considered void, even when there is no evidence
of cheating.

    2.    Given the nature of the phenomena, any prejudgment or bias
on the part of the experimenter, whether "pro" or "con", is more likely
to affect the experimentation, results, and their evaluation in this
area than in any other area of behavioral research. Therefore, we
consider it important to design experiments which  a) can be carried
out using double blind procedures and  b) can be evaluated by objective
measures independent of experimenter belief structures.


[Page 4]

II   TASKS 1 AND 2; EXPERIMENTATION WITH INGO SWANN

    The magnetometer observation of July 1972 indicated at least two
forms of biofield functioning: 1) the passive perception of information
through some as yet unidentified communication channel, and 2) the
active perturbation of the functioning of a laboratory device. The
initial experiments were designed to test each of these functions
separately.

    A.    Probability 1/3 Target Location

        The first experiment to be carried out under Tasks 1 and 2
had as its goal the testing of the hypothesis that information can be
obtained from locations inaccessible to ordinary viewing.
    In order to place the experiment on a quantitative basis,
a procedure was followed in which a target object was placed in one of
three identical containers, the task of Swann being to enter the
experimental area after placement and indicate the target container.
[...experimental details and results, 50 trials yielding 26 hits at p=0.005...]


[Page 5]

[...continuation of Section A results with statistical analysis...]

    B.    Remote Temperature Control Experiment

        A second experiment was initiated to examine the active
perturbation of the functioning of a laboratory device. The target
chosen was a copper-constantin 30 μV/°F thermocouple sealed in a
50 milliliter flask of helium gas at atmospheric pressure.
[...experimental setup with Mr. Swann's task to control temperature
at the thermocouple junction, Hewlett-Packard Model 425A DC microvoltmeter
and strip chart recorder...]


[Page 6]

    [...continuation of Section B results. The data, shown in Figure 3,
were obtained in the following procedure. After a 20-minute control
period in which the temperature was stabilized, a predetermined random
series of ten "heat" and "rest" commands were read out by the
experimenter at 3-minute intervals. The recorded data indicates that
nine of the ten commands resulted in changes in agreement with the
commands. Control runs with other laboratory personnel under identical
conditions yielded null results. Therefore it can be concluded that
the control of temperature variations in a remote object is indicated.]


[Page 7]

    C.    4-State Random Generator Experiment

        A third experiment with Mr. Swann involved the use of an
electronic random number generator which randomly chooses one of
four possible targets (p = 1/4) without indicating its choice until
Mr. Swann had indicated to the machine his choice by pressing a
button.
[...experimental design details, the apparatus, the PASS button,
double-blind nature of the experiment...]


[Page 8]

    [...continuation of Section C results: 7 runs of 20+ trials each,
total scoring at p=0.35 level (not significantly different from chance
overall), but learning trend across runs at 0.7/run learning rate.]


[Page 9]

    D.    Additional Areas Indicating Further Investigation

        Of further significance, but difficult to evaluate quantitatively
at this point, was a number of subjective observations reported by Mr.
Swann during the course of experimentation. Mr. Swann is extremely
articulate about subjective impressions, visualizations, etc., which
leads to the possibility of building up a coherent picture over a long
period of experimentation which can then be tested objectively.


[Page 10]

[Section D continues with examples — helium gas as yellow, scanning beams,
quartz prism rainbow, etc.]


[Page 11]

III  TASK 3; EXPERIMENTATION WITH URI GELLER

    The experiments conducted with Geller in November-December, 1972,
fell into two broad categories:
    1.    Perception experiments in which he was asked to identify and
draw the contents of opaque sealed envelopes, to identify a die face
concealed in a metal box, and to find objects hidden in one of ten
identical film cans.
    2.    Experiments involving physical effects in which he was asked
to interact with laboratory equipment by perturbing the experimental
apparatus without physical contact.
    All experiments were monitored by simultaneous filming, video-
taping, sound recording, and, where appropriate, laboratory instrumenta-
tion. The experiments performed with Mr. Geller are summarized below
in writing and a film covering the experimentation is in progress.

    A.    Probability 1/6 Double-Blind Dice Box Experiment

        A double-blind experiment was performed in which a single
die was placed in a closed metal box. The box was vigorously shaken
by one of the experimenters and placed on a table. The orientation
of the die inside the box was unknown to the experimenters at that
time. Mr. Geller would then look at the box without touching it and
call out which die face he believed was uppermost. He gave the correct
answer each of 8 times the experiment was performed. The probability
that this could have occurred by chance alone is approximately one
in a million. The experiment was actually performed ten times, but on
two occasions the subject said his perception was not clear and he
was allowed to pass.


[Page 12]

    B.    Probability 1/10 Hidden Object Experiment

        For this experiment ten identical aluminum film cans with
stainless steel tops were placed in a row. An outside assistant not
associated with the research would place the cans in a random position
and put the target object into one of them. He would then put caps on
all the cans and leave the experimental area, notifying the experimenters
that the experiment was ready. The experimenters, who were not aware
which can contained the object, would then enter the room with Geller
(i.e., the experiment was carried out in a double-blind fashion).
[...protocol details: subject would pass his hand over the row of cans
or simply look at them, call out which were empty, then announce
target...He had no difficulty identifying the location of water, steel
ball bearings and small magnets. This task was performed twelve times,
without error. The probability that this could have occurred by chance
alone is about one in a trillion. On two occasions he declined to
answer. One target that "stumped" him was a paper-wrapped metal ball
bearing. The other was a sugar cube.]

    C.    Picture Drawing Experiment

        In this experiment simple pictures were drawn on 3x5 file
cards. The field of possibilities of target materials was at no
time revealed to Mr. Geller. The pictures were put into double-sealed
envelopes by an outside assistant not associated with the experiment


[Page 13]

and placed in a safe for which the experimenters did not have the
combination. To conduct the experiment, the experimenters, two of
which had to be present, were permitted to select an envelope at
random from the safe, open it to identify the picture, seal it again
and enter the experimental room. Geller made seven almost exact
reproductions of the seven chosen target pictures, with no errors
(see Fig. 5). Video and audio monitoring did not reveal any cueing
possibilities. Figure 6 shows the results obtained when a drawing
was brought in as a test by an outside consultant to a potential
sponsor. The inspiration of the drawing was a magazine cartoon
shown in the upper right. The drawing itself is shown in the upper
left, and Geller's version is shown in the lower right. A double
blind version of the drawing experiment is shown in Fig. 7 where
an envelope chosen at random and unknown both to experimenter and
Geller resulted in the reproduction shown.

    Two experiments to measure physical perturbation of
laboratory apparatus were also carried out. One of these involved
apparently exerting a force on a laboratory balance, and the other
was the generation of an apparent magnetic field recorded by a
magnetometer. Both of these experiments were performed several
times with results improving with repetition, showing apparent
evidence of learning taking place.


[Page 14]

    D.    Laboratory Balance

        A precision laboratory balance measuring weights from one
milligram to fifty grams was placed under a bell jar. This balance,
made by Scientech Corp., Boulder, Colorado, generated an electrical
output voltage in proportion to the force applied to it.
[...experimental setup details. On several occasions the subject
caused the balance to respond as though a force were applied to the
pan. These displacements increased from 50 - 1500 milligrams and were
significantly different in signature from those that could be produced
by striking the bell jar or the table or jumping on the floor. Efforts
on our part to debunk the experiment by the use of magnets or discharge
of static electricity against parts of the apparatus were unsuccessful.
Day-long control runs with no effort on Geller's part failed to reveal
noise or artifacts resembling the signals produced by Geller's efforts.
Therefore, the experiment indicated an apparent ability of Geller to
affect the apparatus by an as yet unidentified means.]


[Page 15]

    E.    Magnetometer Experiment

        A Bell gaussmeter was used to determine if Mr. Geller could
perturb an instrument sensitive to magnetic fields. The instrument
was set to a full scale sensitivity of 0.3 gauss. The subject would
move his empty hands near the instrument in an effort to cause a
deflection of the chart recorder monitoring the magnetometer output.
In carefully filmed experiments, Geller was able to perturb the
magnetometer causing full scale deflection without touching the
measuring head of the instrument. Geller was examined before, during,
and after experimentation with the same magnetometer probe to insure
against the presence of artifact-producing materials.

    F.    Further Observations

        A number of other observations were made which for one
reason or another did not meet our rigorous protocol prerequisites
for a controlled experiment and therefore are not to be included
in the category of experiments A through E which we consider well
controlled.
        Perhaps the most notable of these were a class of observations
associated with one of Geller's alleged attributes that had been
reported to us, which was that he was able to bend or break metal
from a distance without touching it. In the laboratory we did not
find him able to do so. It was always necessary for him in the
experimental situation to have physical contact with any metal he
bent. In a more relaxed protocol where he was permitted to touch
the metal, metals were bent. This included SRI-manufactured and


[Page 16]

serialized rings of brass and copper which were measured to require 150
lbs. force to bend them. However, it was not clear whether such
bending took place because Mr. Geller has extraordinarily strong
fingers and good control of micro-manipulatory movements, or whether
the metal "turns to plastic" in his hand as he claims. Our final
conclusion in watching our films was that simple photo interpretation
is insufficient to determine whether metals are being bent by normal or
paranormal means.

    In summary, the three perception experiments (hidden drawings
in envelopes, double-blind hidden object experiment, double-blind
die-in-the-box experiment) and the two psychokinetic experiments
(depression or raising of a weight on an electrical scale and the
magnetometer indication) do not admit of any ready counterhypothesis
to the concept of extraordinary human functioning.


IV   SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

    The data gathered to date with the aid of consultants Swann and
Geller point to the existence of an as yet unidentified mode of
extraordinary human functioning. Efforts to explain the phenomena
either within the framework of conventional concepts or by exposure
of outright fraud have both met with failure at this point. With
regard to the latter possibility, it might be mentioned that our
efforts to detect fraud were quite sophisticated (including the use
of consultant magicians on our part) under the hypothesis that
subjects skilled in trickery might be sent to us to test the
adequacy of our program to detect fraud.

    The observations to date are sufficiently detailed and well
controlled to indicate without doubt that extraordinary human
functioning has been observed. Further work is required, however,
to obtain sufficient data to permit the emergence of patterns of
cause-effect relationships and the elucidation of the mechanisms and
agencies involved.


[Pages 17-22 — figures]

[Page 17 — Figure 1: cumulative hits curve, Swann probability 1/3 experiment, 50 trials, Σ=26 (p=0.005)]

[Page 18 — Figure 2: hits/run plot, Swann probability 1/3 experiment, 5 runs of 10 trials each, learning rate 0.5]

[Page 19 — Figure 3: Swann remote temperature control chart recording, R and H markers showing rest/heat commands across time]

[Page 20 — Figure 4: hits/run plot, Swann 4-state random generator experiment, 7 runs, 190 trials, learning rate 0.7]

[Page 21 — Figure 5: Geller picture-drawing experiment results, dated 12/7/72, showing target/response pairs (plane, smiley face, car, etc.) with "URI" signature and timestamps 1:40, 1:45, 1:50]

[Pages 22-29 — additional figures showing Geller experimental drawings + apparatus diagrams]


Approved For Release 2000/08/10 : CIA-RDP96-00787R000100180001-3
