UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Defense
Intelligence
Reference
Document

[black redaction bar] Acquisition Threat Support

11 March 2010

ICOD: 1 December 2009

DIA-08-1003-007

Advanced Nuclear Propulsion
for Manned Deep Space
Missions

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This document is made available through the declassification efforts
and research of John Greenewald, Jr., creator of:

The Black Vault

The Black Vault is the largest online Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
document clearinghouse in the world. The research efforts here are
responsible for the declassification of hundreds of thousands of pages
released by the U.S. Government & Military.

Discover the Truth at: http://www.theblackvault.com

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Advanced Nuclear Propulsion for Manned Deep Space
Missions

Prepared by:

[(b)(3):10 USC 424]

Defense Intelligence Agency

Author:

[(b)(6)]

Administrative Note

COPYRIGHT WARNING: Further dissemination of the photographs in this publication is not authorized.

This product is one in a series of advanced technology reports produced in FY 2009
under the Defense Intelligence Agency, [(b)(3):10 USC 424] Advanced Aerospace
Weapon System Applications (AAWSA) Program. Comments or questions pertaining to
this document should be addressed to [(b)(3):10 USC 424;(b)(6)] AAWSA Program

Manager, Defense Intelligence Agency, ATTN: [(b)(3):10 USC 424] Bldg 6000, Washington,
DC 20340-5100.

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents

Preface ...................................................................................................................................... v

Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 1

Deuterium, Argon Ion Lasers, and KeV Superexplosives ........................................................ 1

Magnetic Insulation and Inductive Charging ......................................................................... 3
Magnetic Insulation ............................................................................................................. 3
Inductive Charging .............................................................................................................. 4

Deuterium as the Preferred Nuclear Rocket Fuel .................................................................. 5

Magnetic Entrapment of the Charged Fusion Products and the Stopping of the

Proton Beam in Dense Deuterium ........................................................................................ 6
Solution in Between Two Extremes ...................................................................................... 10
The Nonfission Ignition of Small Deuterium Nuclear Explosives .......................................... 13
Delivery of a Gev Proton Beam Onto the Deuterium Fusion Explosive ................................. 15

Lifting of Large Payloads Into Earth Orbit ............................................................................ 16

Neutron Entrapment in an Autocatalytic Thermonuclear Detonation Wave —- a
Means to Increase the Specific Impulse and to Solve the Large Radiator Problem 18

Testing the Deuterium Microdetonation Concept ................................................................. 20
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 25

Appendix: Conjectured Metastable Superexplosives Formed Under High Pressure
for Thermonuclear Ignition ................................................................................................. 26

Bombardment of a Solid Target With an Intense Relativistic Electron or Ion

Beam .................................................................................................................................. 28
Hypervelocity Impact .......................................................................................................... 28

Bombardment of a Solid Target With Beams or By Hypervelocity Impact,
Followed By a Convergent Shock Wave ............................................................................... 28

References .............................................................................................................................. 30

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figures
Figure 1. Ignition With 107-Ampere GeV Proton Beam ....................................................... 11
Figure 2. Pure Deuterium Fusion Explosion Ignited With an Intense Ion Beam ... 14
Figure 3. Screening of the Spacecraft ................................................................................. 14
Figure 4. Superconducting “Atomic” Spaceship .................................................................. 15
Figure 5. Argon Ion Laser Igniter ........................................................................................ 17
Figure 6. Autocatalytic Thermonuclear Detonation Using a Soft X-ray ................................. 18
Figure 7. Ordinary Marx Generator ..................................................................................... 21
Figure 8. Super Marx Generator .......................................................................................... 21
Figure 9. Artist’s Conception of a 1.5-km-Long Super Marx Generator ................................ 21
Figure 10. Detail View of a Section of the Super Marx Generator ........................................ 22
Figure 11. Injection of GeV - 10 MA Proton Beam .............................................................. 22
Figure 12. Showing a Few Elements of the Super Marx Generator ...................................... 22
Figure 13. The Superconducting Toroidal Capacitor and Its Discharge Onto the

Target ................................................................................................................................ 24
Figure 14. Explosives .......................................................................................................... 26
Figure 15. With Increasing Pressure, Electron-Bridges are Formed Between

Shells Inside Shells Melting Into Common Shells ................................................................ 26
Figure 16. p-d, Pressure ...................................................................................................... 29
Figure 17. Inertial Confinement Fast-Ignition Configuration ................................................ 30
Tables
Table 1. The Charged Fusion Products of a Detonation in Deuterium: Their

Energy and Velocity ............................................................................................................ 5

Table 2. Critical Ignition Currents for Thermonuclear Reactions ........................................... 8

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Advanced Nuclear Propulsion for Manned Deep Space
Missions

Preface

My interest in space flight dates to when I was about 10 years old and
received as a birthday gift a popular book about the feasibility of space flight.
From it I learned for the first time about Oberth and Goddard and of the
possibility of reaching the Moon with a multistage rocket. This occurred at the
same time that Hahn and Strassmann announced the discovery of nuclear
fission, with the possibility of an atomic bomb by a fission chain reaction.

Having been born in Germany in 1929, I received my Ph.D. in physics under
Heisenberg in 1955. Inspired by the 15-megaton hydrogen bomb test
conducted by the United States in 1952, I have been deeply interested in the
nonfission ignition of thermonuclear reactions by inertial confinement since
1954. At the time all fusion research in the United States was still classified,
but I had quite independently discovered the basic principles of inertial
confinement, the Guderley convergent shock wave, and the Rayleigh
imploding shell solutions. In 1956 I presented my findings at a meeting
organized by Von Weizsäcker at the Max Planck Institute in Goettingen. The
abstracts of this meeting reside today in the University of Stuttgart library.

In 1958 I had delivered a paper at the 2nd United Nations Conference on the
Peaceful Use of Atomic Energy on Nerva-type nuclear rocket reactors. The
paper turned out to be of some importance as I was invited by the U.S.
government to come to the United States under “Operation Paperclip.” In San
Diego I met Ted Taylor and Freeman Dyson, who were working on the famous
“Orion” nuclear bomb propulsion concept. This concept is generally credited to
Stanislaw Ulam, but I know from conversations I had with Heisenberg that a
similar idea had been presented to Heisenberg by Wernher von Braun in Berlin
in or around 1942. Because of my idea to use the Guderley convergent shock
wave solution for thermonuclear ignition, Ted Taylor and Freeman Dyson were
interested in my joining their group. But because at that time this work was
classified and I was not yet a U.S. citizen, this was not possible.

In 1967 I saw a new possibility for the nonfission ignition of thermonuclear
microexplosions by intense relativistic electron and ion beams, driven by a
high-voltage Marx generator. This ignition concept could be used not only to
control the release of energy by nuclear fusion, but also to propel a spacecraft,
replacing the pusher plate of the Orion concept with a magnetic mirror,
reflecting the plasma-fireball of the thermonuclear microexplosion (Reference
1, 2). This idea was adopted by the British Interplanetary Society in its 1978
Project Daedalus starship study, replacing a neutron-rich deuterium-tritium
(DT) thermonuclear explosive with a neutron-poor deuterium-helium3 (DHe3)
explosive (Reference 3). Unlike the DT reaction, in which 80 percent of the
released energy goes into neutrons, most of the energy in the D-He3 reaction
goes into alpha particles, which can be deflected by a magnetic mirror. But

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

because He3 is not abundantly available everywhere, it was proposed to
“mine” it from Jupiter’s atmosphere.

Studies have been conducted on spacecraft propulsion with the matter-
antimatter annihilation reaction, however, it is an enormous technical
challenge to produce antimatter in appreciable quantities. The idea of using
nano-gram amounts of antimatter for the ignition of fission-fusion
microexplosions appears to have credible potential, but even there the
production and storage of nano-gram quantities of antimatter pose serious
technical problems (Reference 4).

We have little reason to expect that new fundamental laws of physics that
could lead to a breakthrough in propulsion still await discovery. Very much as
America was discovered only once, it is quite possible that all the fundamental
laws of physics relevant to propulsion have been discovered, challenging our
imagination to find out if they are sufficient to invent propulsion systems that
ultimately might bring us to Earthlike planets of nearby solar systems.

I conclude this preface with an imaginary talk by Ted Taylor to Freeman Dyson
as recorded by the latter’s son, George Dyson, in his book Project Orion — The
True Story of the Atomic Spaceship (Reference 5), followed by a dream of Ted
Taylor’s. “Freeman’s hope for the Orion had rested on the fact that there
seems to be no law of nature forbidding the construction of fission-free
bombs,” and on the belief that “improvements in the design of the nuclear
devices (by reducing the fraction of total yield due to fission) might achieve
reduction factors of 10² to 10³. This belief in small, fission-free bombs has
largely evaporated.” “One exception is Ted (Taylor). He remains convinced
that small, clean bombs could propel Orion - but he still fears more than ever
that such devices would be irresistible as weapons, until we outgrow the habit
of war. There are lots of different routes to that final result of a very clean
bomb.” “Could you make a one-kiloton explosion in which the fission yield was
zero, which is bad news on the proliferation front, but could turn Orion into
something quite clean?” “Freeman thinks Ted is wrong — and Ted hopes
Freeman is right.” I for my part think Freeman is wrong.

Many years later, shortly before his death, Ted Taylor reported: “I had a dream
last night, about a new form of nuclear weapon, and I am really scared of it.”
He reported that when he woke up, he wrote down his dream, and it appeared
scientifically sound and feasible. What was it? We never will know with
certainty, but I have a guess: it is the possibility of chemical superexplosives
(explained in the appendix) powerful enough to ignite a thermonuclear bomb.

vi

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction

As Hermann Oberth proved for chemical rockets in his 1923 book The Rocket into
Planetary Space (Reference 6), this paper will try to prove for thermonuclear rockets
the following:

• At the present state of science and technology one can build spaceships driven by
deuterium thermonuclear reactions, able to reach the outer limits of the solar
system.

• Such spaceships permit the manned exploration of the entire solar system and
beyond, with the ultimate potential to reach nearby solar systems.

e The cost in research and development to build such spaceships will be high but still
well within what is economically feasible.

e Using the same physical principles as for deuterium fusion rockets will also lead to
the realization of clean nuclear energy, justifying the expenditures for these large
projects.

Deuterium can be used as the rocket fuel of choice in addition to any inert material that
is suitable as a propellant. This propellant material is available on most planetary
bodies and particularly on the comets of the Oort cloud. The main idea is that by
gradual radial expansion from the Sun by building bridges over the Oort clouds, which
presumably surround all suns, Earthlike planets in neighboring solar systems can
eventually be reached.

The first and most important step toward this goal is to reach the focus of the Einstein
gravitational lens at 550 AU (astronomical units). At this location, one can use the Sun
as the lens of a super telescope, an idea first proposed by Claudio Maccone in 1993.
Present knowledge is that there are planets in nearby solar systems that are likely
Earthlike planets. It is only with this gigantic telescope that one can determine if life on
these planets is possible. But because of the complexity of this task, a manned mission
to the Einstein gravitational lens focus is likely to be needed, possible only with
advanced nuclear rocket propulsion.

Deuterium, Argon Ion Lasers, and KeV Superexplosives

The goal is a spacecraft that can be refueled while landing on a planetary body, which
can be a planet, an asteroid, or a comet. With heavy water available on many planetary
bodies but in particular on comets, this suggests the use of deuterium (D) as the
thermonuclear rocket fuel. Ignition of deuterium though, is more difficult than ignition
of the deuterium-tritium (DT) reaction or of the deuterium-helium3 (DHe3) reaction.

The DT reaction is the easiest to ignite, but 80 percent of the energy goes into
neutrons, which cannot be deflected by a magnetic mirror. In the DHe3 reaction all the
energy goes into charged fusion products, but in a mixture of D with He3 there are still
some neutron-producing deuterium-deuterium (DD) reactions. More important is the
fact that, unlike deuterium, He3 is largely unavailable. There is some indication of He3
on the surface of Moon. In the Daedalus starship study by the British Interplanetary

1
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Society, it was proposed to “mine” He3 from the atmosphere of Jupiter. In either case,
the cost to recover appreciable amounts of He3 would be very high.

For the DD reaction, the situation is quite different because there the instantaneous
burn with deuterium of the T- and He3- reaction products of deuterium makes possible
a detonation wave in dense deuterium. In this detonation wave, only 38 percent of the
energy released goes into neutrons, compared with 80 percent for the DT reaction.

Deuterium can be extracted from water with relative ease in three steps:
• Water is electrolytically split into hydrogen and oxygen.

• The hydrogen gas, composed of H2 and HD, is cooled down until it liquefies,
whereby the heavier HD is separated by the force of gravity from the lighter H2.

• The newly produced HD is heated and passed through a catalyst, splitting HD into
H2 and D2, according to the equation (Reference 7) 2HD —> H2 + D2.

Since the gravitational field on the surface of a comet or small planet, from which the
D2 shall be extracted, is small, the apparatus separating the liquid HD from H2 must be
set into rapid rotation.

The comparatively small amount of energy needed for the separation can ideally be
drawn from a ferroelectric capacitor (for example, a barium-titanate capacitor with a
dielectric constant ε ≈ 5,000), to be charged up to many kilovolts by a small fraction of
the electric energy drawn from the deuterium fusion explosions through a magneto
hydrodynamic loop (Reference 2). One can also draw this energy from a small on-board
nuclear reactor requiring only a small radiator, slowly charging the capacitor.
Alternatively, one may store the needed energy in the magnetic field of a
superconductor.

For the launching of the spacecraft into Earth orbit, a very different scheme is
proposed. It requires special materials that are readily available on Earth but not on
extraterrestrial bodies serving as landing points to refuel the spacecraft. There the
primary resource is water from which deuterium is obtained.

In the Orion bomb propulsion project, a large number of fission bombs, or fission-
triggered fusion bombs, were proposed to lift the spacecraft into space. Since this
would release a large amount of highly radioactive fission products into the
atmosphere, it was one of the causes that killed Orion. Even though large payloads can
be brought into Earth orbit by chemical rockets, this remains very expensive, and an
acceptable less expensive nuclear alternative is highly desirable.

There appear to be two possibilities:

• A laser driven by a high explosive, powerful enough to ignite a DT microexplosion,
which in turn can initiate a thermonuclear detonation in deuterium (Reference 8).

• A second, more speculative possibility is the conjectured existence of chemical
kiloelectronvolt (keV) superexplosives. These are chemical compounds formed under
high pressure, resulting in keV bridges between inner electron shells and able to

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

release intense bursts of keV X-rays capable of igniting a DT thermonuclear reaction,
which in turn could ignite a larger deuterium detonation.

To realize the first possibility, one might consider pumping a solid argon rod with a
convergent cylindrical shock wave driven by a high explosive (Reference 9). If the
argon rod is placed in the center of convergence and reaches a temperature of 90,000
°K, the upper ultraviolet laser level of the argon will be populated. Following this
heating, the argon cylinder radially expands and cools, with the upper laser level frozen
into the argon. The energy thus stored in the upper laser level can then be removed
from the rod by a small Q-switched laser, the resulting powerful laser pulse optically
focused onto a thermonuclear target.

To realize the second possibility, one would have to subject suitable materials to very
high pressure (Reference 10, 11). These energetic states can be reached only if during
their compression the materials are not appreciably heated, because such heating
would prevent the electrons from forming the bridges between the inner electron shells.
Details of the second possibility are provided in the appendix.

Magnetic Insulation and Inductive Charging

Two concepts are of great importance for the envisioned realization of a deuterium
fusion-driven starship:

• The concept of magnetic insulation, which permits the attainment of ultrahigh
voltages in high vacuum (Reference 1).

• The concept of inductive charging, by which a magnetically insulated conductor can
be charged up to very high electric potentials (Reference 12).

MAGNETIC INSULATION

In a greatly simplified way, magnetic insulation can be understood as follows: if the
electric field on the surface of a negatively charged conductor reaches a critical field on
the order of Ec ~ 10⁷ V/cm, the conductor becomes the source of electrons emitted by
field emission. The critical electric field for the emission of ions from a positively
charged conductor is ~ 10⁸ V/cm. Therefore, if in a high-voltage diode the electric field
reaches ~ 10⁷ V/cm, breakdown will occur by electric field emission from the cathode to
the anode. But if a magnetic field of strength 8 measured in gauss is applied in a
direction parallel to the negatively charged surface, and if B > E, where E (like B) is
measured in electrostatic cgs units, the field-emitted electrons make a drift motion
parallel to the surface of the conductor with the velocity.

[equation]

To keep vd/c < 1 then requires that E < H. Let us assume that H ≈ 2x 10⁴ G, which can
be reached with ordinary electromagnets, means that E ≤ 2x 10⁴ esu = 6x 10⁶ V/cm.

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For a conductor with a radius of λ~10m = 10³ cm, an example for a small starship
configuration, one can reach a voltage on the order of Eλ ≤ 6 x 10⁹ volts.

INDUCTIVE CHARGING

To charge the spacecraft to the required gigavolt potentials, we choose for its
architecture a large but hollow cylinder, which at the same time acts as a large
magnetic field coil. If thermionic electron emitters are placed inside this coil and the

magnetic field of the coil rises in time, Maxwell’s equation ∇x E = −(1/c) ∂B/∂t induces
an azimuthal electric field inside the coil:

[equation] (2)

where B = Bz is directed along the z-axis, with r the radial distance from the axis of the
coil. In combination with the axial magnetic field, the electrons from the thermionic
emitters make a radial inward-directed motion

[equation] (3)
By Maxwell’s equation div E = 4πner, this leads to the buildup of an electron cloud inside
the cylinder, resulting in the radial electric field

[equation] (4)
This radial electric field leads to an additional azimuthal drift motion
[equation] (5)

superimposed on the radially directed inward drift motion vr.

For the newly formed electron cloud to be stable, its maximum electron number density
must be below the Brillouin limit:

[equation] (6)

where mc² = 8.2 x 10⁻⁷ erg is the electron rest mass energy. For B = 2x10⁴G, one
finds that nmax ≈ 4x 10¹³ cm⁻³. To reach with a cylindrical electron cloud of radius R a

4
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

potential equal to V requires an electron number density n ≈ V/πeR² . For V = 10⁹ volts
≈ 3x10⁶ esu and R = 10³cm, one finds that n ~ 2x10⁶ cm⁻³, well below nmax.

Deuterium as the Preferred Nuclear Rocket Fuel

To appreciate the importance of deuterium as the preferred and abundantly available
nuclear rocket fuel, one must consider the secondary reactions with D of the He3 and T
reaction products from D-D fusion. Taking these reactions into account, one obtains
from 6 deuterium nuclei an energy of 26.8 megaelectronvolts (MeV) in charged fusion
products, made up of He3 and H, and an energy of 16.55 MeV in neutrons. This means
62 percent of the energy is released into charged fusion products and 38 percent into
neutrons—a substantial improvement over the DT reaction, in which only 20 percent of
the energy goes into He⁴.

Of interest also is the average velocity, averaged over the momentum of the charged
fusion products, because it is a measure of the maximum specific impulse, respectively
the maximum exhaust velocity:

[equation] (7)

For the six charged fusion reaction products (given in Table 1), one obtains v̄ =
1.5x 10⁹ cm/s.

Table 1. The Charged Fusion Products of a Detonation in Deuterium: Their
Energy and Velocity

[table]
5

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because the 6 charged fusion products are accompanied by 9 electrons, they have to
share their kinetic energy with 9 electrons. This reduces the maximum specific impulse

by the factor √(6+9)/6 = √2.5 to v̄ = 0.95x10⁹ cm/s.

A reduction of the specific impulse does not occur if the electrons have enough time to
escape the burning plasma behind the detonation front; that is, in a time shorter than
the time for them to be heated by the charged fusion products.

The time needed for the electrons to be heated by the charged fusion reaction products
can be computed from the range Ao of the charged fusion products and their velocity v
in a plasma at the temperature T. For the He⁴ fusion products, the range is given by

[equation] (8)

This time is

[equation] (9)

It then has to be compared with the time the electron can escape the burning plasma
behind the detonation front, given by

[equation] (10)

where re is the radius of the burning deuterium cylinder, and ve the electron velocity.
One thus has

[equation] (11)

Putting n = 10²³ cm⁻³, T ≈ 10⁸ K with v~ 10⁹ cm/s, ve~ 10⁹ cm/s, one finds tesc/τ ~
2.5 r0. Therefore, tesc < τ requires that r0 < 0.4 cm.

To reach the highest specific impulse possible, one should make the deuterium cylinder
as thin as possible.

Magnetic Entrapment of the Charged Fusion Products and
the Stopping of the Proton Beam in Dense Deuterium

If a fission bomb is used to trigger a thermonuclear detonation, so much energy is
available that almost any radiation implosion configuration is likely going to work. As an
example, one may place a fission bomb and a sphere of solid deuterium in a shell of

6
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gold, in the two foci of an ellipsoidal cavity. The radiation released by the exploding
fission bomb, by ablating the gold, launches a convergent shock wave into the liquid
deuterium. With the temperature in the shock wave approximately rising as 1/r, where

ris the distance of the shock wave from the center of the deuterium sphere, the
ignition temperature is reached at some distance from the center. But only if this
distance is larger than the stopping length of the DD fusion reaction products, typically
a few cm, is a radially outward-moving detonation wave ignited. This configuration is
essentially the same kind of “hohlraum” (cavity) configuration used in the indirect drive
mode of laser fusion for a small DT sphere.

A configuration of this kind can still be used to burn deuterium if the DT microexplosion
is used to trigger a larger deuterium explosion. For a starship that will depend on
deuterium as its only rocket fuel, this possibility is excluded.

But another possibility arises if the ignition is done with a 107-ampere gigaelectronvolt
(GeV) proton (or deuterium) beam. If focused onto one end of a slender, cylindrical
deuterium rod, the beam not only can be made powerful enough to ignite the
deuterium, but its strong azimuthal magnetic field entraps the charged DD reaction
fusion products within the deuterium cylinder, launching a deuterium detonation wave
propagating with supersonic speed down the cylinder (Reference 13). There the fusion
gain and yield can in principle be made arbitrarily large, depending only on the length
of the deuterium rod.

The range of the charged fusion products is determined by their Larmor radius

[equation] (12)
where
[equation] (13)

In equation (13), c, e are the velocity of light and the electron charge, M the hydrogen
mass, A the atomic weight, and Z the atomic number. E is the kinetic energy of the
fusion products.

If the magnetic field is produced by the proton beam current I, one has at the surface
of the deuterium cylinder the azimuthal magnetic field

[equation] (14)

Combining equation (12) with equation (14) and requiring that ri < r, one finds that

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[equation] (15)

where Ic = 5α. In Table 2, the values for α and Ic for all the charged fusion products of
the DD reaction are compiled. For all of them, the critical current is below Ic = 3.84
x 10⁶ A. Therefore, with the choice I ~ 10⁷ A, all the charged fusion products are
entrapped inside the deuterium cylinder.

Table 2. Critical Ignition Currents for Thermonuclear Reactions
[table]

For the argon ion laser configuration proposed for the launch into Earth orbit, where a
small amount of DT serves as a trigger for the ignition of a larger amount of deuterium,
the ignition of a magnetic field supported detonation wave in deuterium is possible
there with an auxiliary high-explosive-driven megampere current generator, setting up
an axial magnetic field, by an azimuthal current around the rod. The charged fusion
products there are spiraling down the rod. The current needed to entrap the charged
fusion products are there on the same order of magnitude; that is, ~ 10⁷ A.

For the deuterium-tritium thermonuclear reaction, the condition for a propagating burn
in a sphere of radius r and density ρ, heated to a temperature of 10⁸ K, is given by
ρr ≥ 1 g/cm². This requires energy of about 1 megajoule (MJ). For the deuterium

reaction, this condition is ρr ≥ 10 g/cm², with an ignition temperature about 10 times

larger. That a thermonuclear detonation in deuterium is possible at all is due to the
secondary combustion of the T and He3 DD fusion reaction products (Reference 8). The
energy required would be about 10⁴ times larger, or about 10⁴ MJ—for all practical
purposes out of reach for nonfission ignition. However, if the ignition and burn are
along a deuterium cylinder, where the charged fusion products are entrapped by a
magnetic field within the cylinder, the condition ρr ≥ 10 g/cm² is replaced by

[equation] (16)

where z is the length of the cylinder.

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the charged fusion products are entrapped within the deuterium cylinder, and if the
condition ρz ≥ 10 g/cm² is satisfied, and finally, if the beam energy is large enough that
a length z > (10/ρ) cm of the cylinder is heated to a temperature of 10⁹ K, a
thermonuclear detonation wave can propagate down the cylinder. This then leads to
large fusion gains.

The stopping length of single GeV protons in dense deuterium is much too large to fulfill
inequality (Reference 16). But this is different for an intense beam of protons, where
the stopping length is determined by the electrostatic proton-deuteron two-stream
instability (Reference 14). In the presence of a strong azimuthal magnetic field, the
beam dissipation is enhanced by the formation of a collisionless shock (Reference 15)
with the thickness of the shock by order of magnitude equal to the Larmor radius of the
deuterium ions at a temperature of 10⁹ K, which for a magnetic field on the order of 10⁷
G is on the order of 10⁻² cm. For the two-stream instability alone, the stopping length is
given by

[equation] (17)

where c is the velocity of light, ωi the proton ion plasma frequency, and ε = nb/n, with
n the deuterium target number density and nb = 2x10¹⁶ cm⁻³, the proton number
density in the beam. For a hundredfold compressed deuterium rod, one has
n=5x10²⁴ cm⁻³, with ωi = 2x10¹⁵ s⁻¹. One finds that ε = 4x10⁻⁹ and λ ≈ 1.2x10⁻² cm. This

short length, together with the formation of the collisionless magneto-hydrodynamic
shock, ensures the dissipation of the beam energy into a small volume at the end of the
deuterium rod. For a deuterium number density n = 5x10²⁴ cm⁻³, one has ρ = 17 g/cm³,
and to have ρz ≥ 10 g/cm² requires that z ≥ 0.6 cm. With λ < z, the condition for the
ignition of a thermonuclear detonation wave is satisfied. The ignition energy is given by

[equation] (18)

where T ≈ 10⁹ K.

For hundredfold compressed deuterium, one has πr² = 10⁻³ cm², where initially it
was πr² = 10⁻¹ cm². With πr² = 10⁻³ cm² and z=0.6cm, one finds that Eign ≤ 10¹⁶ erg or ≤
1GJ. This energy is provided by the 10⁷-ampere GeV proton beam lasting 10⁻⁷ seconds.
The time is short enough to ensure the cold compression of deuterium to high densities.

For a 103-fold compression, found feasible in laser fusion experiments, the ignition
energy is 10 times less.

In hitting the target, a fraction of the proton beam energy is dissipated into X-rays by
entering and bombarding the high Z material cone, focusing the proton beam onto the
deuterium cylinder. The X-rays released fill the hohlraum surrounding the deuterium

9
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cylinder, compressing it to high densities, while the bulk of the proton beam energy
heats and ignites the deuterium cylinder at its end, launching in it a detonation wave.

If the GeV -10⁷-ampere proton beam passes through background hydrogen plasma with
a particle number density n, it induces in the plasma a return current carried by its
electrons, where the electrons move in the same direction as the protons. But because
the current of the proton beam and the return current of the plasma electrons are in
opposite directions, they repel each other. Since the stagnation pressure of the GeV -
10⁷-ampere proton beam is much larger than that of the electron return current, the
return current electrons will be repelled from the proton beam toward the surface of the
proton beam.

The stagnation pressure of a GeV proton beam is (MH proton mass)
[equation] (19)

For nb = 2x10¹⁶ cm⁻³, one obtains pi ≅ 3x10¹³ dyn/cm³. For the electron return current,
one has (m electron mass)

[equation] (20)
With the return current condition neeve = nieve, where for GeV protons vi ≅ c, one has
[equation] (21)

Taking the value ne = 5x 10²² cm⁻³, valid for uncompressed solid deuterium, one obtains
ve ≅ 10⁴ cm/s and hence pr ≅ 5x10³ dyn/cm². This is negligible against pi, even if ne is
10³ times larger, as in highly compressed deuterium. The assumption that the magnetic

field of the proton beam is sufficiently strong to entrap the charged fusion products
within the deuterium cylinder is therefore well justified.

Solution in Between Two Extremes

With chemical propulsion, manned space flight to the Moon is barely possible and only
with massive multistage rockets. For manned space flight beyond the Moon, nuclear
propulsion is indispensible. Nuclear thermal propulsion is really not much better than
advanced chemical propulsion. Ion propulsion, using a nuclear reactor to drive an
electric generator, has a much higher specific impulse but not enough thrust for short
interplanetary transit times needed for manned missions. This leaves propulsion by a
chain of fission bombs (or fission-triggered fusion bombs) as the only credible option.
There the thrust and specific impulse are comparatively huge, but a comparatively
small explosive yield is desirable. Making the yield too small, the bombs become

10
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extravagant in the sense that only a small fraction of the fission explosive is consumed.
This problem can be overcome through the nonfission ignition of small fusion
explosions. A first step in this direction is the nonfission ignition of deuterium-tritium
(DT) thermonuclear microexplosions, expected to be realized in the near future. This
reaction was chosen for the first proposed thermonuclear microexplosion propulsion
concept, with the ignition done by an intense relativistic electron beam (Reference 1,
2). But because in the DT reaction 80 percent of the energy is released into neutrons
that cannot be reflected from the spacecraft by a magnetic mirror, it was proposed to
surround the microexplosion with a neutron-absorbing hydrogen propellant, increasing
the thrust at the expense of the specific impulse. For this reason, in the “Daedalus”
interstellar probe study by the British Interplanetary Society (Reference 3), the
neutron-less helium3-deuterium (He3-D) reaction was proposed, because for such a
mission the specific impulse should be as high as possible. But even in a He3-D plasma,
there are a some neutron-producing DD reactions. There is no large source of He3 on
Earth, though it might exist on the surface of the Moon and in the atmosphere of
Jupiter. In the DD reaction, much less energy goes into neutrons, but it is more difficult
to ignite.

The situation is illustrated in Figure 1. On the upper left side is the experimentally
verified ignition of a DT pellet with the X-rays generated in an underground test from a
fission bomb (Centurion Halite experiment at the Nevada Test Site). For the ignition of
the DT reaction with propagation thermonuclear burn (that is, detonation), one requires
a few megajoules, with a densityxradius target product, ρr ≥ 1 g/cm². On the upper
right side is the 15-megaton “Mike” test, where with the Teller-Ulam configuration a
large amount of liquid deuterium is ignited with a fission bomb. For the DD reaction
propagating thermonuclear burn (that is, detonation), one requires that ρr ≥ 10 g/cm². At
the bottom is the proposed hypothetical deuterium target, where a detonation wave in
a thin cylindrical deuterium rod is ignited by a pulsed 10⁷-ampere GeV proton beam,
utilizing the strong magnetic field of the beam current.

[Figure 1: Ignition With 107-Ampere GeV Proton Beam (Reference 16)]

11
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To estimate the order of magnitude of what is needed, we consider a spacecraft with a
mass of M0 = 10³ ton = 10⁹ g, to be accelerated by one g ≅ 10³ cm/s², with a thrust
T = M0g ≅ 10¹² dyn. To establish the magnitude and number of fusion explosions needed
to propel the spacecraft to a velocity of v = 100 km/s = 10⁷ cm/s, we use the equation

[equation] (22)

where we set c ≅ 10⁸ cm/s, equal to the expansion velocity of the fusion bomb plasma.

We thus have

[equation] (23)
The propulsion power is given by
[equation] (24)

which in our example is P = 5x10¹⁹ erg/s.

With E = 4x10¹⁹ erg equivalent to the explosive energy of one kiloton of TNT, P is
equivalent to about one nuclear kiloton bomb per second.

From the rocket equation

[equation] (25)

M

where M0 is the initial and M1 the final mass, and setting M1 = M0 − ΔM , where
ΔM << M0 is the mass of all used up bombs, one has

[equation] (26)

Here v is the velocity reached by the spacecraft after having used up all the bombs of
mass ΔM. If one bomb explodes per second, its mass according to equation (23) is m0
= 10⁴ g.

12
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Assuming the spacecraft reaches a velocity of [equation] the velocity
needed for fast interplanetary travel, one has [equation], requiring [equation]

kiloton fusion bombs, releasing the energy [equation]. By
comparison, the kinetic energy of the spacecraft [equation] is 10

times less. In reality it is still smaller, because a large fraction of the energy released
by the bomb explosions is dissipated into space.

One can summarize these estimates by concluding that a very large number of nuclear
explosions are needed, which for fission explosions, as well as for deuterium-tritium
explosions, would become very expensive. This strongly favors deuterium, which is
more difficult to ignite than a mixture of deuterium with tritium but is abundantly
available. The following text tries to show how bomb propulsion solely with deuterium
might be possible.

The Nonfission Ignition of Small Deuterium Nuclear
Explosives

With no deuterium-tritium (DT) microexplosions yet ignited, the nonfission ignition of
pure deuterium (DD) fusion explosions seems to be a tall order. An indirect way to
reach this goal is by staging a smaller DT explosion with a larger DD explosion. There
the driver energy, but not the driver, may be rather small. A direct way requires a
driver with order of magnitude larger energies.

The generation of GeV potential wells, made possible with magnetic insulation of
conductors levitated in ultrahigh vacuum (in a laboratory on Earth), has the potential to
lead to order of magnitude larger driver energies (Reference 1). It is the ultrahigh
vacuum of space that enables this to be achieved without levitation. Therefore, the
spacecraft, acting as a capacitor, can be charged up to GeV potentials.

If the spacecraft is charged to a positive GeV potential, a gigajoule intense relativistic
ion beam below the Alfvén current limit can be released from the spacecraft and
directed to the deuterium explosive for its ignition. If the current needed for ignition is
below the Alfvén limit for ions, the beam is “stiff.” The critical Alfvén current for protons

is [equation], where [equation], with v the proton velocity and c the
velocity of light. For GeV protons, I_A is well in excess of the critical current (Reference

15) to entrap the DD fusion reaction products, the condition for detonation (Reference
13).

In a possible bomb configuration shown in Figure 2, the liquid (or solid) D explosive has
the shape of a long cylinder, placed inside a cylindrical “hohlraum” h. A GeV proton
beam I coming from the left, in entering the hohlraum, dissipates part of its energy into
a burst of X-rays compressing and igniting the D bomb-cylinder. With its gigajoule
energy lasting less than 10⁻⁷ seconds, the beam power is greater than 10¹⁶ watts,
sufficiently large to ignite the D explosive. The main portion of the beam energy is
focused by the cone onto the deuterium rod, igniting at its end a detonation wave.

13
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Figure 2: Pure Deuterium Fusion Explosion Ignited With an Intense Ion Beam. D deuterium rod, h
hohlraum, I ion beam, B magnetic field, R miniature target rocket chamber, Ha solid hydrogen, L laser beam to
heat hydrogen in miniature rocket chamber.]

Because the condition for thermonuclear burn and detonation depends only on the
critical current (Reference 15) and not on the radius of the deuterium cylinder, one may
wish to make the diameter of the deuterium cylinder as small as possible, because as it
was shown above, the specific impulse can become largest, with the electrons not
taking away kinetic energy from the charged fusion products. Therefore, the yield of the
deuterium fusion explosions can be made much smaller, eliminating the need for Orion-
type shock absorbers, but the thrust there is also much smaller. For very-deep-space
missions, that would not be a disadvantage.

A problem in either case is that 38 percent of the energy is released as neutrons. In
hitting the spacecraft, they lead to its heating, requiring a presumably large radiator.
For a long and thin deuterium rod, this problem can likely be reduced by a boron
diaphragm on the deuterium rod, as shown in Figure 3, because boron is a good
neutron absorber. It can be enhanced by a hydrogen moderator, because the
absorption cross section for neutrons is greatly increased with a reduced neutron kinetic
energy. Both the boron and the hydrogen there simply become part of the propellant,
reducing the specific impulse but increasing the thrust.

[Figure 3: Screening of the Spacecraft, SC, Against the Neutrons, n, By a Boron Diaphragm, b, With Solid

14

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hydrogen H2 as a Neutron Moderator to Increase the Neutron Absorption Cross Section of Boron, With the Neutrons Released From Deuterium Cylinder d.]

As noted earlier, in comets there is a large amount of deuterium readily available for
mining. And we know comets also contain nitrogen and carbon. From this knowledge
we can assume that very likely other light elements, such as boron, exist in relatively

high concentrations in comets.

Although the waste heat radiator remains a problem, it favors large explosions, because
most of the waste heat accompanies the propellant into space. Droplet radiators, with
the droplets slowly evaporating, are unlikely to work. Placing the neutron-absorbing
radiators near the shock absorber, permitting them to get red-hot, and thermally
insulating the rest of the spacecraft from the radiators may solve the problem.

Delivery of a Gev Proton Beam Onto the Deuterium Fusion

Explosive

The spacecraft is inductively charged
against an electron cloud surrounding the
craft, and, with a magnetic field on the
order of 10°G, easily reached by
superconducting currents flowing in an
azimuthal direction around the craft, is
magnetically insulated against the
electron cloud up to GeV potentials. The
spacecraft and its surrounding electron
cloud form a virtual diode with a GeV
potential difference. To generate a proton

beam, it is proposed to attach a miniature

hydrogen-filled rocket chamber R to the
deuterium bomb target at the position
where the proton beam hits the fusion
explosive (see Figure 2). A pulsed laser
beam from the spacecraft is shot into the
rocket chamber, vaporizing the hydrogen,
which is emitted through the Laval nozzle
as a supersonic plasma jet. If the nozzle
is directed toward the spacecraft, a
conducting bridge is established, rich in
protons between the spacecraft and the
fusion explosive. Protons in this bridge
are then accelerated to GeV energies,
hitting the deuterium explosive. Because
of the spacecraft’s large dimensions, the
jet does not have to be aimed at the
spacecraft very accurately.

The original idea for the electrostatic
energy storage on a magnetically

[Figure 4: Superconducting “Atomic” Spaceship, Positively Charged to GeV Potential, With Azimuthal Currents and Magnetic Mirror M By Magnetic Field B. F fusion minibomb in position to be ignited by intense ion beam I, SB storage space for the bombs, BS bioshield for the payload PL, C coils pulsed by current drawn from Induction ring IR. e electron flow neutralizing space charge of the fusion explosion plasma.]

insulated conductor was to charge up a levitated superconducting ring to GeV

15

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

potentials, with the ring magnetically insulated against breakdown by the magnetic field
of a large toroidal current flowing through the ring. It is here proposed to give the
spacecraft a topologically equivalent shape, using the entire spacecraft for the
electrostatic energy storage (see Figure 4). There toroidal currents flowing azimuthally
around the outer shell of the spacecraft not only magnetically insulate the spacecraft
against the surrounding electron cloud but also generate a magnetic mirror field that
can reflect the plasma of the exploding fusion bomb. In addition, the expanding bomb
plasma can induce large currents, and if these currents are directed to flow through
magnetic field coils positioned on the upper side of the spacecraft, electrons from there
can be emitted into space surrounding the spacecraft by thermionic emitters placed on
the inner side of these coils, inductively charging (Reference 12) the spacecraft for
subsequent proton beam ignition pulses. A small high-voltage generator driven by a
small onboard fission reactor can make the initial charging, ejecting from the spacecraft
negatively charged pellets.

With the magnetic insulation criterion [equation], where B is

the magnetic field surrounding the spacecraft measured in gauss, then for [equation],
[equation], one has [equation], hence E<B. A spacecraft with the

dimension [equation] can then be charged to a potential [equation], with the
stored electrostatic energy on the order of [equation].

For [equation], ε is on the order of 1 gigajoule. The discharge
time is on the order of [equation], where [equation] is the velocity of light. In our

example, we have [equation]. For a proton energy pulse of 1 gigajoule, the beam
power is [equation] = 30 petawatts, large enough to ignite a pure deuterium
explosion.

Lifting of Large Payloads Into Earth Orbit

To lift large payloads into Earth orbit remains the most difficult task. For a launch from
the Earth’s surface, magnetic insulation inside the Earth’s atmosphere fails, and with it
the proposed pure deuterium bomb configuration. A different technique is suggested
here, one I had first proposed in a classified report dated January 1970 (Reference 9),
declassified in July 2007, and thereafter published (Reference 17). A similar idea was
proposed in a classified Los Alamos report, dated November 1970 (Reference 18) and
declassified in July 1979. In both cases the idea is to use an expendable laser for the
ignition of each nuclear explosion, with the laser material thereafter becoming part of
the propellant. The Los Alamos scientists had proposed to use an infrared carbon
dioxide (COz) or chemical laser for this purpose, but this idea does not work, because
the wavelength is too long and therefore unsuitable for inertial confinement fusion. I
had suggested an ultraviolet argon ion laser instead. However, since argon ion lasers
driven by an electric discharge have a small efficiency, I had suggested a quite different
way of pumping it, illustrated in Figure 5. There the efficiency can be expected to be
quite high. It was proposed to use a cylinder of solid argon, surrounding it by a thick
cylindrical shell of high explosive. If simultaneously detonated from outside, a
convergent cylindrical shockwave is launched into the argon. For the high explosive,
one may choose hexogen with a detonation velocity of 8 km/s. In a convergent
cylindrical shockwave, the temperature rises as r⁻⁰·⁴, where r is the distance from axis

16
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the cylindrical argon rod. If the shock is launched from a distance of ~1 m onto an
argon rod with a radius equal to 10 cm, the temperature reaches 90,000 K, just right to
excite the upper laser level of argon. Following its heating to 90,000 K, the argon
cylinder radially expands and cools, with the upper laser level frozen into the argon.
This is similar to a gas dynamic laser, where the upper laser level is frozen in the gas
during its isentropic expansion in a Laval nozzle. To reduce depopulation of the upper
laser level during the expansion by superradiance, one may dope to the argon with a
saturable absorber, acting as an “antiknock” additive. In this way, megajoule laser
pulses can be released within 10 nanoseconds. A laser pulse from a small Q-switched
argon ion laser placed in the spacecraft can then launch a photon avalanche in the
argon rod, igniting a DT microexplosion.

[Figure 5: Argon Ion Laser Igniter, to Ignite a Staged DT →DD Fusion Explosion in a Mini-Teller-Ulam
Configuration. A solid argon rod. HE cylindrical shell of high explosive, d detonators. Q Q-switched argon ion laser oscillator.]

Employing the Teller-Ulam configuration, by replacing the fission explosive with a DT
microexplosion, one can then ignite a much larger DD explosion.

As an alternative, one may generate a high current linear pinch discharge with a high-
explosive-driven magnetic flux compression generator. If the current J is on the order
of J = 107A, the laser can ignite a DT thermonuclear detonation wave propagating down
the high current discharge channel, which in turn can ignite a much larger pure DD
explosion.

If the craft is launched from the Earth’s surface, one has to take into account the mass
of the air entrained in the fireball. The situation resembles a hot-gas-driven gun, albeit
one of rather poor efficiency. There the velocity gained by the craft with N explosions,
each setting off the energy £,,is given by

[equation] (27)

17
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For E, =5x10"erg, M, =10"s, and setting for v= 10 km/s = 106 cm/s the escape

velocity from Earth, one finds that NV > 10. Assuming an efficiency of 10 percent, about
100 1-kiloton explosions would therefore be needed.

Neutron Entrapment in an Autocatalytic Thermonuclear
Detonation Wave — a Means to Increase the Specific
Impulse and to Solve the Large Radiator Problem

The principal reason why neutrons released by thermonuclear reactions pose such a
serious problem is that they cannot be repelled from the spacecraft by a magnetic field.
However, choosing a neutron-absorbing target as shown in Figure 3, one can reduce
the flux of neutrons hitting the spacecraft. Besides inflicting material damage on the
spacecraft, the neutrons release heat that must be removed by a very large radiator.

The idea of the autocatalytic thermonuclear detonation wave (Reference 13) presents a
solution, which if feasible would very much reduce the magnitude of this problem. For
its implementation, it requires very large bremsstrahlung flux densities in the burn zone
behind the thermonuclear detonation front. Such large bremsstrahlung flux densities
will occur in deuterium detonation burn, at the highest temperature for all the
thermonuclear reactions.

In an autocatalytic thermonuclear detonation, explained in Figure 6, soft X-rays
generated through the burn of the thermonuclear plasma behind the detonation front
compress the still unburned thermonuclear fuel ahead of the front. The increase in the
fuel density, both in the Teller-Ulam configuration and in the autocatalytic
thermonuclear detonation wave, is of crucial importance, with the reaction rate
proportional to the square of the density.

[Figure 6: Autocatalytic Thermonuclear Detonation Using a Soft X-ray Precursor From the Burn Zone BZ to Precompress the Thermonuclear Fuel TF Ahead of the Detonation Front DF. The soft x-rays travel through the gap G between the tamp T and the liner L.]

18

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the burning plasma behind the detonation front, energy flows into all spatial
directions. Part is by bremsstrahlung and part by electronic heat conduction. Roughly
half of the energy flows into the liner, one-quarter into the still unburned fuel ahead of
the wave, and one-quarter into the opposite direction. The bremsstrahlung emission
rate is given by

[equation] (28)

For [equation], one has [equation]. The flux of the bremsstrahlung
that goes into the liner is [equation], where r is the radius of the deuterium rod just behind

the detonation front. About one-half of this radiation runs ahead of the detonation
front, where it precompresses the deuterium. Its intensity is:

[equation] (29)

with [equation] (corresponding [equation]), one has

[equation] (30)

We are aiming at a density where the neutrons are absorbed in the burning plasma
cylinder of radius r. If the neutron-deuteron collision cross section is σ, then the
neutron path length An must be smaller than r:

[equation] (31)
or
[equation] (32)

One typically has [equation], hence
[equation] (33)

If r = 0.01 cm, then [equation], where [equation], the particle
number density of liquid deuterium. With [equation], one finds that

[equation]. The flux on a deuterium tube of radius r and length z, where

for the burn zone [equation], one obtains onto its surface [equation]

19
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

= 100 petawatts, certainly powerful enough to compress the deuterium to more than
thousandfold density.

With the entrapment of the neutrons comes an increase of the specific impulse, With 38
percent of the energy going into the kinetic energy of the neutrons and 62 percent into
charged fusion products, the specific impulse is increased by the factor

[equation] = 1.275. This increases the maximum exhaust velocity from
[equation] = 0.063c.

In the course of the thermalization in the supercompressed plasma, the neutron
absorption cross section is greatly increased, both in the liner and tamp, with the liner
also compressed to high densities. If the liner and tamp are made from boron, which
has a large neutron-absorption cross section, the spacecraft is heated only by a greatly
reduced thermal neutron flux, and only this much smaller amount of heat must be
removed by a radiator.

Testing the Deuterium Microdetonation Concept

For the Orion bomb propulsion concept, testing was a serious problem. If tested on the
Earth, it would have resulted in the large fallout of fission products. These tests would
have been needed to study the survival of the pusher plate under the repeated
exposure of kiloton fission explosions (or fusion-boosted explosions). Of course, the
tests could have been carried out in space, but this would have been extremely
expensive, because it would have required launch by chemical rockets of the huge
Orion spaceship into space. Fortunately, this is not necessary for the deuterium
microdetonation propulsion concept because there exists an alternative way to generate
a 10⁷-ampere GeV proton beam: replacing the huge spaceship used as a large capacitor
to be charged up to gigavolt potentials with a “Super Marx generator” (Reference 16).
This Super Marx generator can achieve on Earth what the huge spaceship can achieve
in space: the generation of gigavolt 10⁷-ampere proton beams. Since the realization of
pure deuterium beams would obviously be a breakthrough in fusion, the expenditure for
the development of a Super Marx generator would be well justified.

Up until now nuclear fusion by inertial confinement has been achieved only using large
fission explosives as a means (driver) for ignition. From this experience we know that
the ignition is easy with sufficiently large driver energies, difficult to duplicate with
lasers or electric pulse power by an ordinary Marx generator. The problem therefore is
not the configuration of the thermonuclear explosive but the driver, be it for the ignition
of pure deuterium (D) as in the Mike Test or for the ignition of deuterium-tritium (DT)
as in the Centurion-Halite experiment, because for sufficiently large driver energies the
target configuration is of secondary importance.

Substantially larger driver energies can be reached with the “Super Marx generator.” It
can be viewed as a two-stage Marx generator, where a bank of ordinary Marx
generators assumes the role of a first stage. If the goal is the much more difficult
ignition of a pure deuterium microexplosion, the Super Marx generator must in addition
deliver a much larger amount of energy (compared with that of the most powerful
lasers) and also generate a magnetic field in the thermonuclear target that is strong

20
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enough to entrap the charged DD fusion products within the target. Only then is the
condition for a propagating thermonuclear burn fulfilled.

[Figure 7: Ordinary Marx Generator. In an “ordinary” Marx generator n capacitors C charged up to the voltage v, and are over spark gaps switched into series, adding up their voltages to the voltage V = nv.]

[figure: Super Marx Generator circuit diagram; labels: Super HV, Fusion Target Chamber, Fast Capacitors as Coaxial Transmission Lines, Marx Banks in Oil Tanks]

[Figure 8: Super Marx Generator. In a Super Marx generator, N Marx generators charge up N fast capacitors FC to the voltage V, which switched into series add up their voltages to the voltage NV.]

[Figure 9: Artist's Conception of a 1.5-km-Long Super Marx Generator. Composed of 100 x 15-meter-long high-voltage capacitors, each designed as a magnetically insulated coaxial transmission line. The coaxial capacitors/transmission lines are placed inside a high-vacuum vessel. Each capacitor/transmission line is charged up by two conventional Marx generators symmetrically to 10 MV (+ 5 MV). After charge-up is completed, the Marx generators are electrically decoupled from the capacitors/transmission lines. The individual capacitors/transmission lines are subsequently connected in series via spark gap switches (that is, the “Super Marx” generator), producing a potential of 1 GV.]

21
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 7 shows the circuit of an ordinary Marx generator, and Figure 8 that of a Super
Marx. An artist’s view of a mile-long Super Marx generator, charged up by about 100
ordinary Marx generators and connected to the chamber in which the thermonuclear
target is placed, is shown in Figures 9-11.

[Figure 10: Detailed View of a Section of the Super Marx Generator. Two conventional Marx banks charge up one coaxial capacitor/transmission line element to 10 MV.]

[Figure 11: Injection of GeV - 10 MA Proton Beam. Drawn From Super Marx generator made up of magnetically insulated coaxial capacitors into chamber with cylindrical deuterium target.]

As shown in Figure 12, the Super Marx is made up of a chain of co-axial capacitors with
a dielectric that has to withstand the potential difference of 10⁷ volts between the inner
and outer conductor.

[Figure 12: Showing a Few Elements of the Super Marx Generator]

Following their charging up of the Super Marx generator, the Marx generators are
disconnected from the Super Marx. If the capacitors of the Super Marx can hold their
charge long enough, this can be done by mechanical switches.

22
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To erect the Super Marx, its capacitors C are switched into series by circular spark gap
switches S. The capacitors of the Super Marx are magnetically levitated inside an
evacuated tunnel and magnetically insulated against the wall of the tunnel by an axial
magnetic field B, generated by superconducting external magnetic field coils M. The
magnetic insulation criterion requires that 8 > £, where B is measured in gauss and £
in electrostatic cgs units. If [equation], for example, magnetic insulation is possible up

to [equation], at the limit of electron field emission. To withstand a
voltage of 10⁹ volts between the outer positively charged surface of the capacitors in
series and the tunnel wall then requires a distance somewhat greater than 1 meter.

The capacitance of one co-axial capacitor with the inner and outer radius Ro and R: of
length / and filled with a dielectric of dielectric constant € is

[equation] (34)

Assuming a breakdown strength of the dielectric larger than [equation] and a
potential difference of 10⁷ volts between the inner and outer conductor, the smallest
distance of separation d between both conductors has to be [equation]. If,

for example, [equation], one finds that

[equation]. For these numbers, the energy e stored in the capacitor [equation] is

[equation] (35)

which for the 100 capacitors of the Super Marx add up to [equation]. About 10 times
more energy can be stored if the radius of the capacitor is about 3 times larger, if there
is a larger dielectric constant, or if a combination of these conditions exists. This means
that for about 100 capacitors, energy 10¹⁶ erg = 1 GJ can be stored in the mile-long
Super Marx.

Another idea, proposed by Fuelling (Reference 19), is to place the ordinary Marx
generators of the first stage inside the coaxial capacitors of the Super Marx. The
advantage of this configuration is that it does not require disconnection of the Marx
generators from the capacitors of the Super Marx prior to its firing. Because the
charging and discharging of the Super Marx can be done very fast, one can use
compact water capacitors where [equation]. And instead of magnetic insulation of the
capacitors of the Super Marx against the outer wall, one can perhaps use transformer
oil for the insulation. Giving each inner segment of the Super Marx enough buoyancy,
for example by adding air chambers, these segments can be suspended in the
transformer oil. There the outer radius of the co-axial capacitors is much larger. This
permits storage of gigajoule energies in the Super Marx.

23
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As shown in Figure 13, the last capacitor of the Super Marx is a superconducting ring
with a large toroidal current. There the large azimuthal magnetic field set up by the
toroidal current magnetically insulates the ring against breakdown to the wall.

The load is the deuterium target shown in Figure 13. It consists of a solid deuterium rod
covered with a thin ablator placed inside a cylindrical hohlraum. To the left of the
hohlraum and the deuterium rod is a mini-rocket chamber filled with solid hydrogen.

The method of discharging the energy from the Blumlein transmission line to the target
then goes as follows (see Figure 13):

e A short laser pulse is projected into the mini-rocket chamber through a hole of an
electrode at the center of the ring.

e By heating the hydrogen in the mini-rocket chamber to a high temperature, a
supersonic hydrogen jet is emitted through the Laval nozzle toward the electrode at
the center of the ring, forming a bridge to the target.

e A second laser pulse then traces out an ionization trail inside the hydrogen jet,
facilitating an electric discharge to the target, with the space charge neutralizing
plasma pinching the proton beam down to a small diameter.

[Figure 13: The Superconducting Toroidal Capacitor (a) and Its Discharge Onto the Target (b)]

24
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Super Marx generator therefore can accomplish on Earth what the spacecraft acting
as a large capacitor can do in space.

The testing of an Argon ion laser driven by high explosives can, of course, be done on
Earth, and the same applies to the conjectured superexplosives.

Conclusion

If large-scale manned spaceflight has any future, a high-specific-impulse, high-thrust
propulsion system is needed. The only known propulsion concept with this property is
nuclear bomb propulsion. However, since large-yield nuclear explosions are for obvious
reasons undesirable, the nuclear explosions should be comparatively small. But because
of what Freeman Dyson described as the “tyranny of the critical mass,” small fission
bombs or fission-triggered fusion bombs become extravagant, with only a fraction of

the nuclear material consumed.

In the original Orion bomb propulsion concept, the propulsive power was through the
ablation of a pusher plate. There the energy is delivered to the pusher plate by the
black-body radiation of the exploding bomb. The propulsion by non-fission-triggered
fusion bombs not only has the advantage that it is not subject to the “tyranny of the
critical mass,” but the propulsive power is there delivered by the kinetic energy of the
expanding hot plasma fireball repelled from the spacecraft by a magnetic mirror. This is
particularly true for a pure deuterium bomb, where, compared with DT, more energy is
released into charged fusion products (in a DT bomb, 80 percent of the energy goes
into neutrons).

Whereas in a fission explosion most of the energy is lost into space by the undirected
black-bady radiation, much more propulsive energy can be drawn from the plasma of a
pure deuterium fusion bomb explosion, in conjunction with a magnetic mirror.

Manned space flight requires lifting large masses into Earth orbit, where they are
assembled into a large spacecraft. While this can be done with chemical rockets, it
would be much more economical if it could be done with a chain of small nuclear
explosions. Without radioactive fallout, this can be done with a chain of laser-iqnited
fusion bombs, with one laser for each bomb, where the lasers become part of the
exhaust. Ignition can be done not by infrared chemical or CO2 lasers, as was suggested
by the Los Alamos team (Reference 18), but rather by an ultraviolet laser driven by
high explosives, as suggested by the author (Reference 9).

Looking to the future, using deuterium—widely available on most planets of the solar
system and in the Oort cloud outside the solar system—as the nuclear rocket fuel would
make manned space flight to the Oort cloud possible, at a distance at about one-tenth
of one light year.

' The same |s true for nuclear fission gas core rocket reactors, where much of the unburned fission Fuel is lost in
the exhaust.

25
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appendix: Conjectured Metastable Superexplosives
Formed Under High Pressure for Thermonuclear Ignition

Under normal pressure, the distance of separation between two atoms in condensed
matter is typically on the order of 10-8 cm, with the distance between molecules formed
by the chemical] binding of atoms of the same order of magnitude. As illustrated
schematically in Figure 14, the electrons of the outer electron shells of two atoms
undergoing a chemical binding form a “bridge” between the reacting atoms. The
formation of the bridge is accompanied in a lowering of the electric potential well for the
outer-shell electrons of the two reacting atoms, with the electrons feeling the attractive
force of both atomic nuclei. Because of the lowering of the potential well, the electrons
undergo under the emission of electronvalt (eV) photons a transition into lower energy

molecular orbits. At higher pressures, bridges between the next inner shells are formed
under the emission of soft X-rays.

Going to still higher pressures, a situation can arise as shown in Figure 15, with the
building of electron bridges between shells inside shells.

[Figure 14: Explosives. In an ordinary explosive, the outer-shell electrons of the reacting atoms form “eV” molecules accompanied by the release of heat through eV photons. In a superexplosive, the outer-shell electrons “melt” into a common outer shell with inner electron shells forming “keV” molecules accompanied by the release of X-ray keV photons.]

[Figure 15: With Increasing Pressure, Electron Bridges are Formed Between Shells Inside Shells Melting into Common Shells]

There the explosive power would be even larger. Now consider a situation where the
condensed state of many closely spaced atoms is put under high pressure making the
distance of separation between the atoms much smaller, and where the electrons from
the outer shells coalesce into one shell surrounding both nuclei, with the electrons from
inner shells forming a bridge. Because there the change in the potential energy is much
larger, the change in the electron energy levels is also much larger, potentially on the
order of keV. There then a very powerful explosive is formed, releasing its energy ina

26
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

burst of keV X-rays. This powerful explosive is likely to be very unstable, but it can be
produced by the sudden application of a high pressure at just the moment when it is
needed. Because an intense burst of X-rays is needed for the ignition of a
thermonuclear microexplosion, it could be used as an alternative to the argon ion laser
for the ignition of a pure fusion bomb. The energy of an electron in the ground state of
a nucleus with the charge Ze is

[equation] (36)

With the inclusion of all the Z electrons surrounding the nucleus of charge Ze, the
energy is

[equation] (37)

with the outer electrons less strongly bound to the nucleus.
Now, assume that two nuclei are so strongly pushed together that they act like one

nucleus with the charge 2Ze onto the 2Z electrons surrounding the 2Ze charge. In this
case, the energy for the innermost electron is

[equation] (38)
Or if the outer electrons are taken into account,
[equation] (39)
For the difference, one obtains
[equation] (40)

Using the example Z = 10, which is a neon nucleus, one obtains [equation]. Of course,
it would require a very high pressure to push two neon atoms that close to each other,
but this example shows it is plausible that smaller pressures exerted on heavier nuclei
with many more electrons may result in a substantial lowering of the potential well for
their electrons.

A pressure of [equation] can be reached with existing
technology in sufficiently large volumes, with at least three possibilities:

e Bombardment of a solid target with an intense relativistic electron or ion beam.

e Hypervelocity impact.

27 .
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

• Bombardment of a solid target with beams or by hypervelocity impact, followed by a
convergent shock wave.

BOMBARDMENT OF A SOLID TARGET WITH AN INTENSE
RELATIVISTIC ELECTRON OR ION BEAM

This possibility was considered by Kidder (Reference 20), who computes a pressure of
50 Mb, if an iron plate is bombarded with a 1-MJ - 10-MeV - 10⁶A relativistic electron
beam, focused down to an area of 0.1 cm². Accordingly, a 2-MJ beam would produce
100 Mb. Instead of an intense relativistic electron beam, one may use an intense ion
beam. It can be produced by the same high-voltage technique, replacing the electron
beam diode by a magnetically insulated diode (Reference 21).

Using intense ion beams has the additional benefit that the stopping of the ions in a
target is determined by a Bragg curve, generating the maximum pressure inside the
target, not on its surface.

HYPERVELOCITY IMPACT

A projectile with the density [equation] accelerated to a velocity v = 30 km/s would,
upon impact, produce a pressure of [equation]. The acceleration of the projectile to
these velocities can be done by a magnetic traveling wave accelerator.

BOMBARDMENT OF A SOLID TARGET WITH BEAMS OR BY
HYPERVELOCITY IMPACT, FOLLOWED BY A CONVERGENT SHOCK
WAVE

If, upon impact of either a particle beam or a projectile, the pressure is less than 100
Mb (for example, only on the order of 10 Mb) but is acting over a larger area, a tenfold
increase in the pressure over a smaller area is possible by launching a convergent
shock wave from the larger area on the surface of the target onto a smaller area inside.
According to Guderley, the rise in pressure in a convergent spherical shock wave goes
as r⁻⁰·⁹, which means 100 Mb could be reached by a tenfold reduction in the radius of
the convergent shock wave.

While it is difficult to reach 30 km/s with a traveling magnetic wave accelerator, it is
easy to reach a velocity of 10 km/s with a two-stage light gas gun.

We assume an equation of state of the form [equation]. For a pressure of 100 Mb =
[equation], we may set γ= 3 and [equation], p₀ being the Fermi pressure of
a solid at the atomic number density n₀, with n being the atomic number density at the
elevated pressure [equation]. With [equation] where d is the lattice constant, one has

[equation] (41)

Such a lowering of the inneratomic distance is sufficient for the formation of molecular
states.

28
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculations done by Müller, Rafelski, and Greiner (Reference 22) show that for
molecular states ₃₅Br-₃₅Br, ₅₃I-₇₉Au, and ₉₂U-₉₂U, a twofold lowering of the distance of
separation leads to a lowering of the electron orbit energy eigenvalues by ~ 0.35 keV
and 1.4 keV, respectively. At a pressure of [equation] where d/do = 1/2,
the result of these calculations can be summarized by (6E in keV)

[equation] (42)

replacing equation (40), where Z is here the sum of the nuclear charge for both
components of the molecule formed under the high pressure,

The effect the pressure has on the change p
in these quasi-molecular configurations is t
illustrated in Figure 16, showing a p - d
(pressure-lattice distance) diagram. This
diagram illustrates how the molecular
state is reached during the compression
along the adiabat a at the distance d = d-
where the pressure attains the critical
value p = pc. In passing over this
pressure, the electrons fall into the
potential well of the two-center molecule,
releasing their potential energy as a burst
of X-rays. Following its decompression,
the molecule disintegrates alang the
lower adiabat b. d.

[Figure 16: p-d, Pressure. Inneratomic distance diagram for the upper atomic and lower molecular adiabat.]

If the conjectured superexplosive consists
of just one element, as in the case of the ₃₅Br-₃₅Br reaction or the ₉₂U-₉₂U reaction, no special preparation for the
superexplosive is needed. But as the example of Al-FeO thermite reaction shows,
reactions with different atoms can release a much larger amount of energy compared
with other chemical reactions. For the conjectured superexplosives, this means they
have to be prepared as homogeneous mixtures of nano-particle powders, bringing the
reacting atoms as close together as possible.

For the ignition of a thermonuclear reaction, one may consider the following scenario
illustrated in Figure 17. A convergent shock wave launched at the radius R = Ro into a
spherical shell of outer and inner radius Ro, Ri reaches near the radius R = Ri ata
pressure of 100 Mb. After the inward-moving convergent shock wave has reached the
radius R = Ry, an outward-moving rarefaction wave is launched from the same radius
R= Rx, from which an intense burst of X-rays is emitted. One can then place a
thermonuclear DT target inside the cavity of the radius R = R:, with the target
bombarded, imploded, and ignited by the X-ray pulse. The ignited DT can there serve
as a “hot spot” for the ignition of deuterium.

29
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Figure 17: Inertial Confinement Fast-Ignition Configuration]

References
[1] F. Winterberg, Phys. Rev. 174, 212 (1968).
[2] F. Winterberg, Raumfahrtforschung 15, 208-217 (1971).

[3] Project Daedalus, A. Bond, A.R.Martin et al., J. British Interplanetary Society,
Supplement, 1978.

[4] R. Lewis, K. Meyer, G. Smith, S. Howe,
http://www.engr.psu.edu/antimatter/papers/AIMStar_99.pdf.

[5] G. Dyson, Project Orion, The True story of The Atomic Spaceship, Henry and Holt
Company, New York, 2002.

[6] H. Oberth, Die Rakete zu den Planetenräumen, R. Oldenbourg, Berlin 1923.
[7] K. Clusius and K. Starke, Z. Naturforsch. 4a, 549 (1949).

[8] F. Winterberg, J. Fusion Energy 2, 377 (1982).

30
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[9] F. Winterberg, "Can a Laser Beam ignite a Hydrogen Bomb?”, United States Atomic
Energy Commission, classified January 27, 1970, declassified, July 11, 2007, S-RD-1
(NP — 18252).

[10] F. Winterberg, J. Fusion Energy, DOI 10.1007/s10894-008-9143-4.

[11] Y.K. Bae, Y.Y Chu, L. Friedman Phys. Rev. 54, R1742 (1995).

[12] G.S. Janes, R.H. Levy, H.A. Bethe and B.T. Feld, Phys. Rev. 145, 925 (1966).
[13] F. Winterberg, Atomkernenergie, 39, 265 (1981).

[14] O. Buneman, Phys. Rev. 115, 503 (1959).

[15] L. Davis, R. Lüst and A. Schlüter Z. Naturforsch. 13a, 916 (1958).

[16] F. Winterberg, J. Fusion Energy, DOI 10.1007/s10894-008-9189-3.

[17] F. Winterberg, Laser and Particle Beams, 26, 127 (2008).

[18] J.D. Balcomb et al. “Nuclear Pulse Space Propulsion System,” Los Alamos scientific
Laboratory, classified November 1970, declassified July 10, 1979, LA - 4541 - MS.

[19] S. Fuelling, private communication.

[20] R. Kidder in the Proceedings “Physics of High Energy Density”, Academic Press,
New York 1971.

[21] F. Winterberg, in the same Proceeding p. 398.

[22] B. Müller, J. Rafelski, W. Greiner, Phys. Lett. 47B(1), 5(1973).

31
UNCLASSIFIED//[struck through] FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
