UNCLASSIFIED / 2@R-65526541=06E-0R=>

Defense
Intelligence
Reference
Document

Fi i wswt*wsés—sisSzr Acquisition Threat Support

6 April 2010

ICOD: 1 December 2009

DIA-08-1004-007

Concepts for Extracting
Energy From the Quantum
Vacuum

UNCLASSIFIED / / &@Ra@hhiGdtda GEOR

----- PAGE BREAK -----

This document is made available through the declassification efforts
and research of John Greenewald, Jr., creator of:

Phemplacik@evault

The Black Vault is the largest online Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
document clearinghouse in the world. The research efforts here are
responsible for the declassification of hundreds of thousands of pages
released by the U.S. Government & Military.

Discover the Truth at: http://www.theblackvault.com


----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / F@R-@5F2GHE-UGE-Bits =

Concepts for Extracting Energy From the Quantum Vacuum

Prepared by:

(b)(3):10 USC 424

Defense Intelligence Agency

Author:
(b)(6)

Administrative Note

COPYRIGHT WARNING: Further dissemination of the photographs in this publication is not authorized.

This product is one in a series of advanced technology reports produced in FY 2009

under the Defense Intelligence Agency, [(b)(3):10 USC 424] Advanced Aerospace
Weapon System Applications (AAWSA) Program. Comments or questions pertaining to
this document should be addressed to [(b)(3):10 USC 424;(b)(6)] AAWSA Program

Manager, Defense Intelligence Agency, ATTN: [(b)(3):10 USC 424] Bldg 6000, Washington,
DC 20340-5100.

UNCLASSIFIED / /SORn.@EE165A40165-02 nie

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /#@R-OFFEGEAL-VGE-ONEY

Contents
T SUUITUINALY ace cece eens ee nee eee eens cman eene re nanens cenenenseceacenace nace neneaananane rane canenanane nanamanenenan _— Vv

II. Historical Concepts for Extracting Energy and Thermodynamic Considerations 1

III. Origin of Zero-Point Field EM@rgy ...ccccsecsccsccssncccvscansncucnenccaueneresauancneneccuancoenanenan 4
Elements Of QED THEOry .....cccsenccecesenecucecesevevuseverecesenerurerecueurupuseraveracureceraresesaserer 4
Elements of SED THe Ory .....cccsenscenscecsennonseeusssuneneaeeeeeeuceaeeneennne ne cewuensnanenerensaseagene 6

IV. Review of Selected ExperiMentS .c.c.csecsesceenenenenes Aeenenanenananensnanenanananenssecananceasanen F
Voltage Fluctuations in Coils Induced by ZPF at High Frequency.....cssccscceccenneree 7

ZPF Energy Extraction by Ground State Energy Reduction ....scsescsesrscocrerecssureree LO

Tunable Casimir Effect ....ccusu008 sve sdusseneaanaesceanansagennannnaes dace saeeenereareenns 14
EV Phenomenon .....ccesssesseeceenresnreseees veveuerenes cuveueerevasurasueererersvsssreeerereenes pesererense 17
V. Theoretical Considerations and TSSUGS 2.0. .cccceeeceeeeeenee eee enemas secenewemnnennenerseenennenen 22
QED Vacuum Revisited .......cccseccrcsuccssscveseseveveseccsesususenentousevsrtresesencsesuscnasesusavssse 22

QED Vacuum as a PHO MUM a, cece cn neccsneecnesauveanceneensuneuenecennanauaeuseuauanuauenscsneusaunnacs 22
QED Vacuum as a Mathematical “Placeholder” for Fluctuating Matter Fields 23

Casimir Effect Revisited .........cecccsecususesevenaresus . peeve pera panewesenereeureseseseuenssusunerevanns 24
Casimir Effect in the Plenum Picture ......cc:cscscesrsecseecsessnonsenecseuausesuseausnuenssaare 24
Casimir Effect in the Fluctuating Matter Fields Picture ......:cscsccccesusesuserenuseaes 24

Type I (Transient) and Type II (Continuous) Machines.....cccessssnsenccccnenseoneneuanes 25

Degradability of the Vacuum ........cccce ene neve senemeneannens dene cuceuerenvausureneaesussrsacecasers 25

Alternatives to QED.....sene0 Ane seme ne eeaeenanannenennneceneresensqamaaananseananensramensecnananemanananen 26
Neoclassical Theories of QED Vacuum Fluctuation Effects.......... wav sseuseauseneass 26
SED Model Revisited ......scccsencsssececuccauseseuarssuscrecesenes cresereataenes eveneneneeens weneeenenes 27

QED Without Second-Quantized Fields .....cscsescseccsccrnseeceneseceneuscercuuscneeuscetsnsen 2S

Examples of Degradable of Decaying VACUUM ....sscscscrescccnenssssenenensnanenenenanenenenee LO

Gravitational Squeezing of the Vacuum...... eouneeune avaenesen euvauavascenenusen eusneneneaunee 29
Redshifting the Vacuum .cccscccscscsereneneresceuscrencrescnecunsseccneseauarcecenenesracerseseeumcsen 29
Vacuum Field Stress: Negative Vacuum Energy from the Casimir Effect...... 30

fil

UNCLASSIFIED / /POR'OPrPrerre es ONS

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / ®6R-@FFE6PHi-USE-OfE Yr

SqueeZed Quantum VACUUM cercscccscsccescsescecseseuecescnveusesuserceuseeusesencnesenecenenssenes 32
Dirac Vacuum Decay: “Sparking the Vacuum” .....cscccccssnessnenenesusscnnessennecenennes OO
Magnetically Induced Decay of the Dirac Vacuum ......:sssseseerseesess nesneneanesenees OG
Melting the QcD Vacuum BER EEC SESR ER ER ESSER RE SEEESESE SEES SEERA RRRAAEATERARARERRRRE RARER TERRE REE REE 35
Summary: ZPF Modes and Vacuum Field Energy ...sssscosssecsscses wuncneaueunsoncoenass 37
VI. Conclusion: The Way Forward to 2050.....cccccsssessecscnaneesnenensnencesnenatecenanenceensuas 37
ACkNOWledGeMEnS .,...ccscreccrarenceusesccsvaveveceesrecsnecusurseurererusususussvesusssererererusapapussrures 41
Appendix: The QCD Bag Model ...csscccnereranerecenecsnenecenenenenenenen sea nenanananesenansnannnecananen 42
REFEPENCES 2.2... 1c sc ncscreevscecsesanecereccnerecccnceverareseseseseseeesuesnenererenensntnenereranerarsensscnsususes 44
Figures
Figure 1. [illustration of the Casimir Effect 1... ..ccccscscscecnenenecenerecununesenenenenesensneaeneeeeer 1
Figure 2. Vacuum-Fluctuation Battery........ gaanenacanaecnaucvansneranancuanensvanauenavencnancsenananan i
Figure 3. ZPE Resonant Dielectric Spheres Electrical Power Generation.........csevess 3
Figure 4, Theoretical Voltage Spectral Density of a Tungsten Coil. ....ccccecsesesesenunenes 9
Figure 5. Energy Released from Ground State Suppression of Hydrogenic Atom
ID) @ MICTOCAVILY 2. ...cscccreceserevevereranesesuraversveser sevesevevesevens w L1
Figure 6. Apparatus for Ground State Energy Suppression: Casimir Segmented
Tunnels Sean ee eee ese sees SURE EB ESeaseeese PERLE E SEL ET OLE ETRE SEES TET E TETRIS SROCSR ES SR EEBE aes 13
Figure 7. Alternative Apparatus for Ground State Energy Suppression: Casimir
Strip and Spacer-Channels ........... se neaenensseauneseseseneeenenenenscunenenenserseneauseses 13
Figure 8. Experimental Apparatus for Ground State Energy Reduction Tests ....... 14
Figure 9. Tunable Casimir Effect: Conductor vs. Dielectric. .........scsunesseusesescvureouner 15
Figure 10. Tunable Casimir Effect: Engine Cycle ........cccccccenececuceccceneeecesvscnesenenesenes 16
Figure 11. Schematic of EV (Pulse Discharge Source) Device. ...ccsccsccnsennscesecenenenes 18
Figure 12. SEM of EV Damage to Ceramic Plate. .......cscccccssnenssenenensecnevensnscenanoneuanen i9
Figure 13. SEM of EV Damage to Palladium Target .....cccssscccnesecenesceuuereseausuccuesenenen 20
Figure 14. EV Moving at Downward Angle Away From Its Source, ...ccsscesssecrsnens 21

UNCLASSIFIED / 4hOReOEPSGEHUSE OnE

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /#@R=-@5EEGE-16E-08e=

Concepts for Extracting Energy From the Quantum Vacuum

I. Summary

Quantum theory predicts that the vacuum of space throughout the universe is
filled with electromagnetic waves, random in phase and amplitude,
propagating in all possible directions, and with a cubic frequency distribution.
This differs from the cosmic microwave background radiation and is referred
to as the electromagnetic quantum vacuum, which is the lowest energy state
of otherwise empty space. When integrated over all frequency modes up to the
Planck frequency, vp (~ 104 Hertz [Hz]), it represents an energy density of as
much as 10147 J/m?, which is far in excess of any other known energy source,
even if only an infinitesimal fraction of it is accessible. Even if one is
constrained to integrate over all frequency modes only up to the nucleon
Compton frequency (~ 1077 Hz),/ this energy density is still enormous (~ 1075
3/m?). In addition, the electromagnetic quantum vacuum is not alone; it
intimately couples to the charged particles in the Dirac sea of virtual fermion
particle-antiparticle pairs (aka the Dirac vacuum) and thereby couples to the
other interactions inherent in the Standard Model (weak and strong force
vacua), However, in the Standard Model of particle physics, the weak force
vacuum is essentially the electromagnetic vacuum, because photons serve as
the massless eigenstates of (unified) electroweak theory with an “effective”
coupling constant that is in fact electromagnetic in strength.? And we can
safely ignore any coupling of the quantum electromagnetic vacuum to the
quantum chromodynamic vacuum in this paper because the latter coexists in
two phases: (1) the ordinary vacuum exterior to the hadron, which is
impenetrable to quark color, and (2) the vacuum interior of the hadron,’ in
which the Yang-Mills fields that carry color (gluons) propagate freely. Both
vacuum phases are separated by a boundary at the surface of the hadron on
which the Yang-Mills and quark fields satisfy boundary conditions.

Even though this zero-point field (ZPF) energy seems to be an inescapable
consequence of quantum field theory, its energy density is so enormous as to
make it difficult to reconcile. Instead, many quantum calculations subtract the
ZPF energy by ad hoc means (for example, renormalization). However, the
effects of the quantum vacuum ZPF that are responsible for a variety of well-
known physical effects are observed, such as:

» Lamb shift.

- Spontaneous atomic emission.

1 The characteristic frequency associated with the size of nucleons.

2 The weak force coupling constant is merely the quantum electrodynamic/electromagnetic
coupling constant (j.e., the fine structure constant, a) that is “suppressed” by a simple
inverse-quadratic ratio of the virtual weak force particle mass to the proton mass (a factor
of 10°),

3 Madrons are the class of strongly interacting elementary particles which are a bound state
of quarks. This class of particles has two subclasses: baryons (é.g., protons and neutrons
comprised of three quarks} and mesons (comprised of two quarks).

Vv

UNCLASSIFIED / /#@R-OFEEGRREUSEORET”

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /POROPPHICIALT USE Ott"

+ Low-temperature van der Waals forces.
- Casimir effect.
« Source of photon shot and fluctuating radiation-pressure noise in lasers.

- Astronomically observed cosmological constant (aka dark energy, a form of
Casimir energy according to the Schwinger-DeWitt quantum ether
prescription [Reference 1-4]}. —

Rather than eliminate the ZPF energy from the equations, there is much left to
be learned by exploring the possibility that it is a real energy. From this
perspective, the ordinary world of matter and energy is like foam atop the
quantum vacuum sea. If the ZPF is real, then there is the possibility that it can
be tapped as a source of power or be harnessed to generate a propulsive force
for space travel. This notion of exchanging energy with the quantum vacuum
is the focus of this paper.

An aircraft propeller or jet engine can push air backwards to propel the
aircraft forward. A ship or boat propeller does the same thing in water. On
Earth there is air or water to push against. But a rocket in space has no
material medium to push against, and so it needs to carry and eject propellant
in order to provide momentum. A deep-space rocket must start out with all the
propellant it will ever require, and this quickly results in the need to carry
additional propellant just to propel the propellant. The breakthrough desired
in space travel is to eliminate the need to carry propellant at all, that is, to
generate a propulsive force without carrying and ejecting propellant?

Vi

UNCLASSIFIED / / Gir OEP USrOne =

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /FOR-@FF6>H-1S-ONtTT

II. Historical Concepts for Extracting Energy and
Thermodynamic Considerations

The Casimir force is a force associated with the electromagnetic quantum vacuum
(Reference 5). This force is an attraction between parallel uncharged metallic plates
that has now been well measured and can be attributed to a minute imbalance in the
ZPF energy (ZPE) density inside the cavity between the plates versus the region outside
the plates as shown in Figure 1 (Reference 6-8). As shown in the figure, the vacuum is
full of virtual photons (that is, zero-point vacuum fluctuations), but photons with
wavelengths, 4, more than twice the plate separation, d, are excluded from the space
between them, which causes the imbalance that pushes the plates together.

The primary requirement for space travel is energy. It is sometimes assumed that
attempting to extract energy from the vacuum ZPF would somehow violate the laws of
thermodynamics. Fortunately, it turns out that this is not the case. A thought
experiment published by Forward (Reference 9, 10) demonstrated how the Casimir
force could in principle be used to extract energy from the vacuum ZPF. Forward
showed that any pair of conducting plates at close distance experiences an attractive
Casimir force that is due to the electromagnetic ZPF of the vacuum. A “vacuum-
fluctuation battery” can be constructed by using the Casimir force to do work on a stack
of charged conducting plates as shown in Figure 2. By applying a charge of the same
polarity to each conducting plate, a repulsive electrostatic force will be produced that
opposes the Casimir force. If the applied electrostatic force is adjusted to be always
slightly less than the Casimir force, the plates will move toward each other and the
Casimir force will add energy to the electric field between the plates. The battery can be
recharged by making the electrical force slightly stronger than the Casimir force to re-
expand the foliated conductor.

/ Electrostatic
4 . ; »Repulsion

“~ 4
‘ Az Vacuum

- Fluctuation
f + Attraction
a
lates
p fluctuations
Figure 1. IHustration of the Casimir Effect Figure 2. Vacuum-Fluctuation Battery (Reference 9)

Cole and Puthoff (Reference 11) verified that (generic) energy extraction schemes are
not contradictory to the laws of thermodynamics. For thermadynamically reversible
processes, no heat will flow at temperature T = 0. However, for thermodynamically

UNCLASSIFIED /#PO@ROFFSGE- US Oner

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / BGR-O551654-U6E-Ohe——

irreversible processes, heat can be produced and made to flow, either at T = 0 or at
any other 7 > 0 situation, such as by taking a system out of mechanical equilibrium.
Moreover, work can be done by or done on physical systems, either at T= 0 or T > 0
situations, whether for a reversible or irreversible process. However, if one is
considering a net cyclical process on the basis of, say, the Casimir effect, then energy
would not be able to be continually extracted without a violation of the second law of
thermodynamics. Thus, Forward’s process cannot be cycled to yield a continuous
extraction of energy. Here, the recharging of the battery would, owing to frictional and
other losses, require more energy than is gained from the ZPF. There is no useful
engine cycle in this process; nonetheless, the plate-contraction phase of the cycle does
demonstrate the ability to cause “extraction” of energy from the ZPF. It does reflect
work done by the ZPF on matter.

Another illustrative example of an early scheme for extracting energy from the ZPF is
described in a patent by Mead and Nachamkin (Reference 12). They propose that a set
of resonant dielectric spheres be used to extract energy from the ZPF and convert it
into electrical power. They consider the use of resonant dielectric spheres, slightly
detuned from each other, to provide a beat-frequency downshift of the more energetic
high-frequency components of the ZPF to a more easily captured form. Figure 3 shows
two embodiments of the invention. The device includes a pair of dielectric structures
{items 12, 14, 112, 114 in the figure) that are positioned proximal to each other and
which intercept incident ZPE radiation (items 16, 116 in the figure). The volumetric
sizes of the structures are selected so that they resonate at a particular frequency of
the incident radiation. But the volumetric sizes of the structures are chosen to be
slightly different so that the secondary radiations emitted from them (items 18, 20, 24,
118, 120, 124 in the figure) at resonance interfere with each other, thus producing a
beat frequency radiation that is at a much lower frequency than that of the incident
radiation, and that can be converted into electrical energy. A conventional metallic
antenna (loop or dipole type, or a RF cavity structure; items 22, 122 in the figure) can
then be used to collect the beat frequency radiation. This radiation is next transmitted
fram the antenna to a converter via an electrical conductor or waveguide (items 26,
126 in the figure) and converted to electrical energy. The converter must include: 1) a
tuning circuit or comparable device so that it can effectively receive the beat frequency
radiation, 2) a transformer to convert the energy to electrical current having a desired
voltage, and 3) a rectifier to convert the energy to electrical current having a desired
waveform (items 28, 30, 32, 34, 128, 130, 132 in the figure).

UNCLASSIFIED / ®@@==tG>i-UG>ONi=

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED /

p24.
10 YY
an 5
a
18~, > —_ 20
Ftd ey “yf! ; Lee wy!
f x S22
j 1
f
g no a
| te -s
: Ii Ik
ne / i ‘| y ay a ° ied
| : L -s 136 if}
20 at pa’ ash

Figure 3. ZPE Resonant Dielectric Spheres Electrical Power Generation (Reference 12)

The receiving structures are composed of dielectric material in order to diffract and
scatter the incident ZPE radiation. The volumetric sizing requirements for the receiving
structures are selected to enable them to resonate at a high frequency corresponding to
the incident ZPE radiation, based on the parameters of frequency of the incident ZPE
radiation, and the propagation characteristics of the medium (vacuum or otherwise)
and the receiving structures. Since the ZPE radiation energy density increases with
increasing frequency, greater amounts of electromagnetic energy are potentially
available at higher frequencies. Consequently, the size of the receiving structures must
be miniaturized in order to produce greater amounts of energy from a system located
within a space or volume of a given size. Therefore, the smaller the size of the receiving
structures, the greater the amount of energy that can in principle be produced by the
system.

Although a computer model study performed at the Air Force Research Laboratory
(Edwards AFB, CA) indicates that the invention could work, no experimental study has
been performed to validate this in the lab (F. B. Mead, private communication, 2002).
Regarding critiques, it is not clear how the beat frequency can be picked up by the
receiving loop antenna. There is no nonlinear method in the invention showing that an
electromagnetic beat frequency can be generated and coupled to the loop. Without a
nonlinear coupling method there will be no sidebands, one of which would be frequency
down-shifted and called the beat frequency. The coupling method requires the
generation of sidebands in the mixing of two different frequencies via a nonlinear
technique. However, an easy resolution to this potential deficiency is that the resonant
dielectric spheres could be constructed of a nonlinear dielectric material.

Although several novel ZPF energy extraction mechanisms have been proposed in the
popular and technical literature, no practicable technique has been successfully
demonstrated in the laboratory. To better understand how ZPE extraction methods

UNCLASSIFIED / /®#@?eOFEECGHU6E Ohne

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / F@R-@FEtGEH-USEOnrY

might work, it is necessary to characterize the physics of the ZPF and proposed energy
extraction techniques, and to evaluate their feasibility for application to space power
and propulsion systems. In what follows, the physics of the ZPF and the experimental
investigations being pursued to address the question of extracting energy from the
quantum vacuum are summarized.

III. Origin of Zero-Point Field Energy

ELEMENTS OF QED THEORY

The basis of the ZPF is typically attributed to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.
According to this principle, A and B are any two conjugate observables that one is
interested in measuring, and they obey the commutation relation [A,8] = iA.4 Their
corresponding uncertainty relation is AAAB = A/2, where AA is the variance (aka
uncertainty) of observable A and A8 is that of the conjugate observable B. This relation
states that if one measures observable A with very high precision (that is, its
uncertainty AA is very small), then a simultaneous measurement of observable 8 will be
less precise (that is, its uncertainty AB is very large}, and vice versa. In other words, it
is not possible to simultaneously measure two conjugate observable quantities with
infinite precision. This minimum uncertainty is not due to any correctable flaws in
measurement, but rather reflects the intrinsic fuzziness in the quantum nature of
energy and matter. Substantial theoretical and experimental work has shown that in
many quantum systems the limits to measurement precision is imposed by the
quantum vacuum ZPF embodied within the uncertainty principle. Nowadays one would
rather see the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle as a necessary consequence, and
therefore, a derived result of the wave nature of quantum phenomena. The
uncertainties are just a consequence of the Fourier nature of conjugate pairs of
quantities (observables). For example, the two Fourier-wave-conjugates time and
frequency become the pair of quantum-particle conjugates time and energy and the
two Fourier-wave-conjugates displacement and wavenumber become the pair of
quantum-particle conjugates position and momentum. For more on this see, for
example, Reference 13.

Classically, electromagnetic radiation can be pictured as waves flowing through space at
the speed of light. The waves are not waves of anything substantive, but are in fact
ripples in the state of a field. These waves carry energy, and each wave has a specific
direction, frequency and polarization state. This is called a “propagating mode of the
electromagnetic field.” A useful tool for modeling the propagating mode of the
electromagnetic field in quantum mechanics is the ideal quantum mechanical harmonic
oscillator: a hypothetical charged mass on a perfect spring oscillating back and forth
under the action of the spring’s restoring force. The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
dictates that a quantized harmonic oscillator (aka a photon state) can never come
entirely to rest, since that would be a state of exactly zero energy, which is forbidden
by the commutation relation outlined above. Instead, every mode of the field has Aw/2
as its average minimum energy in the vacuum. (This is a small amount of energy, but
the number of modes is enormous, and indeed increases as the square of the
frequency. The product of this minuscule energy per mode, multiplied by the huge
spatial density of modes, yields a very high theoretical energy density per unit volume.)

‘jis the unit complex number, A is Planck’s reduced constant, 1,055 x 10 3* 3s.
5 wis the mode or photon frequency and Aw is the energy of a single mode ar photon.

4
UNCLASSIFIED / / R@ReQEELGRA bald Sie

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / 56@-05FI6541-6E-0N——

This ZPE term is added to the classical blackbody spectral radiation energy density
p(m)de (that is, the energy per unit volume of radiation in the frequency interval (@, o

+ do)) (Reference 14):

2
p(w) dw = ° 5 ho + bo dw
exp(ha@/kT)—-1 2

(ar

: h
= bo coth & do,
2m Cc 2kT

(1)

where c is the speed of light (3.0 x 108 m/s), k& is Boltzmann’s constant (1.3807 x 10 2
Jj/K), T is the absolute temperature, and w = 2nv is the angular frequency. The factor
outside the square brackets in the first line of Equation (1) is the density of mode (or
photon) states (that is, the number of states per unit frequency interval per unit
volume); the first term inside the square brackets is the standard Planck blackbody
radiation energy per made; and the second term inside the square brackets is the
quantum zero-point energy per mode. Equation (1) is called the Zero-Point Planck
(ZPP) spectral radiation energy density. Planck first added the ZPE term to the classical
blackbody spectral radiation energy density in 1912, although it was Einstein, Hopf, and
Stern who actually recognized the physical significance of this term in 1913 (Reference
14). Direct spectroscopic evidence for the reality of ZPE was provided by Mulliken’s
boron monoxide spectral band experiments in 1924, several months before Heisenberg
first derived the ZPE for a harmonic oscillator from his new quantum matrix mechanics
theory (Reference 15).

Following this line of reasoning, quantum physics predicts that all of space must be
filled with electromagnetic zero-point fluctuations (aka the zero-point field) creating a
universal sea of zero-point energy. The density of this energy depends critically on
where the frequency of the zero-point fluctuations ceases. Since space itself is currently
thought to break up into a kind of “quantum foam” at the Planck length, Ap (~ 10 375 m),
it is argued that the ZPF must cease at the corresponding vp. If true, then the ZPE
density would be ~ 10143 J/m3, 108 orders of magnitude greater than the radiant
energy at the center of the Sun! Formally, in Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) theory,
the ZPE energy density is taken as infinite; however, arguments based on quantum
gravity considerations yield a finite cutoff at vp. Therefore, the spectral energy density
is given by p(w}dw = (f43/2n2c3)dw, which integrates to an energy density, pe =
Aivp’/8n7*c3 ~ 10413 J/m3. As large as the ZPE is, interactions with it are typically cut off at
lower frequencies depending on the particle coupling constants or their structure.
Nevertheless, the potential ZPF energy density predicted by quantum physics is
enormous.

Many experts have claimed that an enormous vacuum ZPF energy density would
produce a corresponding enormous gravitational force of attraction (via Einstein’s
General Theory of Relativity) that would cause the immediate collapse of the entire
universe. Thus they argue that such enormous vacuum energy cannot be real due to
the fact that our universe is observed to be undergoing accelerated expansion.
However, such arguments are spurious because numerous studies in quantum field
theory show that it is the low-frequency ZPF modes that contribute significantly to the
physical vacuum energy, because 1) only the low-frequency modes are affected by the

UNCLASSIFIED / -PF@R-OFFEGH=HUSE-OnNEY

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / EQ Re@EELGL Pll Glial bts

presence of cosmological spacetime curvature, and 2) the high-frequency modes are
unaffected by the presence of cosmological spacetime curvature so they take the flat
Minkowski spacetime form; that is, these modes contribute nothing to the physical
vacuum energy (Reference 4). This then enforces a very low-frequency cutoff that
renormalizes the total vacuum energy, leading to a minute residual cosmological
vacuum energy density of 10 ? J/m%, which has been observed. Also, investigators
studying supersymmetric and superstring quantum gravity theories have proposed the
limited cancellation of some positive energy electromagnetic ZPF modes by some
negative energy fermionic (Dirac vacuum) ZPF modes as an explanation for the
observed minute vacuum energy density.

ELEMENTS OF SED THEORY

An alternative to QED, stochastic electrodynamics (SED) identifies the origin of the ZPF
as a direct consequence of a classical ZPF background. SED begins with the ordinary
classical electrodynamics of Maxwell and Lorentz, but instead of assuming the
traditional homogeneous solution of the source-free differential wave equations for the
electromagnetic potentials, one instead considers that due to multiple charged particles
moving throughout the universe, there is always a random electromagnetic radiation
background present that affects the particle(s) in any experiment. This new boundary
condition (random radiation background) replaces the prior null background of
traditional classical electrodynamics. Moreover, the principle of relativity dictates that
identical experiments performed in different inertial frames must yield the same result,
and that this random classical electromagnetic radiation must be isotropic in all inertial
frames; it is invariant under scattering by a dipole oscillator, invariant under redshift
(Doppler, cosmological, gravitational, no Einstein-Hopf drag force}, and must therefore
have a Lorentz-~invariant energy density spectrum. The only energy density spectrum
that obeys such conditions is one that is proportional to the cubic power of the
frequency. Interestingly, this is exactly the same frequency dependence as that of the
QED spectral ZPF energy density described above, when the température T is set to
zero in Equation (1). Thus in SED, the random radiation assumes the role of the ZPE of
QED, and is termed the classical electromagnetic ZPE. Planck’s constant appears then in
SED as an adjustable parameter that sets the scale of the ZPE spectral density.

The formulation of the SED model has evolved over time, beginning with the work of
Nernst in 1916 and the later foundational work of Marshall and Boyer in the 1960s
(Reference 14). The original Standard SED model was based on random phases with
fixed electric-field mode amplitudes. The more recent Modified SED model employs
random phases with random electric-field mode amplitudes and a full probability
distribution for the ground state amplitude, in agreement with quantum theory
(Reference 16). A comparison of SED with quantum theory shows that the first and
second moments of the spectral energy distribution are identical, but beyond that, the
distributions diverge widely. Nevertheless, several quantum theory results have been
reproduced by means of the SED approach, such as (Reference 14, 17):

® Quantum mechanical harmonic oscillator.
e Lamb shift.

e Blackbody radiation.

UNCLASSIFIED / / FO? O@FPtGitrUSrOne=

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / -@R-0F=26?t-6E-OnE

« Van der Waals forces.
e Casimir forces.

© Diamagnetism.

e Davies-Unruh Effect.

The strength of the SED model is that it is heuristically appealing, with transparent
derivations, and it is applicable to linear systems. SED calculations have also been
shown to be in one-to-one correspondence with the expectation values of the
Heisenberg quantum equations of motion for linear systems. Both SED and QED will
play a role in the discussions to follow.

IV. Review of Selected Experiments

In what follows, is an outline each of the proposed experimental concepts that were
selected for theoretical and laboratory investigation. A subset of our proposed concepts
has undergone preliminary evaluation by Lockheed-Martin review panels involving both
internal R&D personnel and outside experts on theory and experimentation (V. Teofilo,
private communication, 2005).

VOLTAGE FLUCTUATIONS IN COILS INDUCED BY ZPF AT HIGH
FREQUENCY

In a series of experiments, Koch et al. (Reference 18-20) measured voltage fluctuations
in resistive wire circuits that are induced by the ZPF. The Koch et al. result is striking
corroboration of the reality of the ZPF and proves that the ZPF can do real work (cause
measurable currents). Although the Koch et al. experiment detected minuscule
amounts of ZPF energy, it shows the principle of ZPF energy circuitry to detect vacuum
fluctuations and opens the door to consideration of means to extract useful amounts of
energy. The secondary consequences on other phenomena, if energy can be
successfully extracted, have not yet been investigated.

Blanco et al. (Reference 21) have proposed a method for enhancing the ZPF-induced
voltage fluctuations in circuits, Theoretically treating a coil of wire as an antenna, they
argue that the antenna-like radiation resistance of the coil should be included in the
total resistance of the circuit, and suggest that this total resistance should be used in
the theoretical computation of ZPF-induced voltage fluctuations. Because of the strong
dependence of the radiation resistance on the number of coil turns (quadratic scaling),
coil radius (quartic scaling), and frequency (quartic scaling), any enhanced ZPF-induced
valtage fluctuations should be measurable in the laboratory at readily accessible
frequencies (100 MHz compared to the 100 GHz range necessary in the Kach et al.
experiments).

In the theory of Blanco et al., random voltage fluctuations are conveniently described
by their frequency spectrum. That is, given a sufficient time interval of measured
voltages, the measurements are Fourier transformed to the frequency domain to
determine how the valtage fluctuations are distributed (for example, quantity of low-
frequency, long duration fluctuations relative to high-frequency, short-duration

UNCLASSIFIED / /POT@OPPTCEE ese errr

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /#@R-OFFEtGEHUSEOHnES

fluctuations). Theoretically, the spectrum of voltage fluctuations, S(w,7), of a resistive
circuit is given by (Reference 21):

ROD oth he

§(o0 7)= ——
( ) qT 2 QRT

(2)

where R(w,7) is the total resistance (ohmic plus radiative), w is the (angular) frequency,
and 7 is the absolute temperature. The resistance R(w,7T) is temperature dependent
through its ohmic contribution.® Note the similar hyperbolic cotangent functions
appearing in Equation (2) and in the second line of Equation (1). The postulate of
Blanco et al, is that the total resistance must include the radiation resistance of the
circuit (Reference 21):

R(w,T) =R.

shimic

(w,T)+R,,,(@) (3)

Under the assumption that the wavelengths of the ZPF modes of interest are larger

than the dimensions of the circuit, the radiation resistance of a coil is given by
(Reference 21):

2n?N*fawy
Ray (®) =F (<2) — (4)
3 0¢ c

where AN is the number of coil turns, and a is the radius of the coil winding.

According to Blanco et al., large enhancements in ZPF-induced voitage fluctuations are
possible. By reducing the temperature to minimize ohmic resistance, making the coil of
many turns and large radius, and performing measurements at high frequency, it
should be possible to investigate this amplification effect. The predicted coil-enhanced
voltage spectrum can readily be computed. The result is shown in Figure 4 for a 1 cm
diameter coil of 2000 turns, made of 38 AWG tungsten wire, and kept at a temperature
of 3 K. In Figure 4, the upper (blue) curve represents the predicted voltage spectral
density for the combined ohmic plus radiation resistance. The lower (red) curve is the
predicted result when radiation resistance is ignored. If the postulate of Blanco et al. is
correct, the enhancement in voltage fluctuations due to the antenna-like nature of the
coil should be easily measured at frequencies as low as 100 MHz (where the coil
enhancement effect is ~ 100-fold for tungsten).

5 The radiation resistance depends only on frequency.

8
UNCLASSIFIED / / BORO EEEGEA-USGE-ONEY

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /5@R-O5F26>h1-6E-082—

17 T t q q T t a | | T q t t qT t a |
10 = =
1g] oon |
10° Material: W 3
r N coil: 2000 J
_ 10" 3
a F a coil: 1. cm E
pL b coil: 0.01 cm _
= F 4
et / ; q
a T: 3 Kelvin q
21
10 F q
10°
23]
10 6& L L FS Ss SO OO OS | L t [rn oo wae ae
10° 10° 40°
f (Hz)

Figure 4. Theoretical Voltage Spectral Density of a Tungsten Coil

To successfully measure the ZPF-induced voltage fluctuations, the requirements of low
temperature, large coil, and high frequency must be met. The low-temperature
requirement is met by performing the experiment in a cooled dewar. Existing high-
quality cryogenic dewars (pumped down to 3 K) and sensitive laboratory instruments
are suitable for the measurements. The cold spot in one particular dewar under
consideration is cylindrical, 2.5 cm in both diameter and height. The largest coil that
can be installed will thus have a coil radius of approximately a = 1 cm. To keep the
linear dimension of the coil small will require a small wire thicknesses, perhaps b =
0.01 cm (gauge 38 AWG). By winding the coil in a number of layers (10 or 12 layers), a
large number of turns can be accommodated, perhaps WV = 2,000 turns. To minimize
ohmic resistance, wire made of tungsten (W) is preferred; however, copper (Cu) is a
suitable alternative.

Voltage fluctuations in the 100 MHz range are easily detected using commercially
available laboratory equipment; hence this experiment could be performed using
tungsten without resorting to the more sophisticated Josephson junction techniques
required by Koch et al. for their higher frequency measurements. For a copper wire coil,
the magnitude of the enhancement effect is reduced somewhat compared to the
tungsten results shown in Figure 4. But for frequencies approaching the GHz regime,
the radiation resistance enhancement effect in copper wire is still predicted to be over

9
UNCLASSIFIED / / F@feOFrtetreSt-one

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /F@PR-OPPPGEH=USE ONES”

four orders of magnitude larger. Commercial equipment readily allows measurements of
the voltage spectrum in the GHz regime. Therefore, given a cost tradeoff of copper vs.
tungsten coil fabrication, the use of copper coils may be preferred. Suitable coils can be
fabricated by a custom coil-winding vendor. A second coil can be used in a control
experiment constructed with the same parameters as the first coil, but with half of its
turns wound in the reverse direction. This will make the coil non-inductive so that its
voltage spectral density should correspond to the lower red curve in Figure 4.

ZPF ENERGY EXTRACTION BY GROUND STATE ENERGY REDUCTION

As first analyzed by Boyer (Reference 22), and later refined by Puthoff (Reference 23),
the following paradox was addressed: even though atomic ground states involve
electrons in accelerated motion, such states are nonetheless radiationless in nature -
even though it is well known from classical electrodynamics that charged particles
undergoing acceleration must always emit radiation. For the standard Bohr ground
state orbit of the hydrogen atom, this was interpreted as an equilibrium process in
which radiation by the electron in its ground state orbit was compensated by absorption
of radiation from the background vacuum electromagnetic ZPE. This interpretation has
recently been strengthened by the analyses of Cole and Zou (Reference 24, 25) using a
SED model for the vacuum ZPE. Since the balance between emitted orbital-acceleration
radiation and absorbed ZPE radiation is modeled as taking place primarily at the ground
state orbital frequency, one can consider the possibility of using this feature in some
type of mechanism to extract energy from the ZPF. One fundamental difference
between the SED interpretation and that of quantum mechanics is that in quantum
mechanics the 1s state of the electron is regarded as having zero angular momentum,
whereas in the SED interpretation the electron has an angular momentum of

myer (137.7

The Bohr radius of the hydrogen atom in the SED view is 0.529 A. This implies that the
wavelength (2) of zero-point radiation responsible for sustaining the orbit is 2r-0.529 -
137 = 455 A (or 0.0455 yum). It has been conjectured by Puthoff and Haisch (private
communication, 2004) that suppression of zero-point radiation at this wavelength (and
at shorter wavelengths) inside a Casimir microcavity could result in the decay of the
electron to a lower energy state determined by a new balance between classical
emission of an accelerated charge and absorption of zero-point radiation at 4 < 455 A,
where 21 depends on the microcavity plate separation (d). Since the frequency of this
orbit is 6.6 x 1015 Hz, no matter how quickly the atom were to be injected into a
Casimir microcavity, one would assume that the decay process would be a slow one as
experienced by the orbiting electron. Figure 5 shows a schematic representation of a
hydrogenic atom in free space and inside a microcavity.

? me = electron mass (9.11 x 10 3! kg), re = electron radius, atomic fine structure (a.k.a. QED coupling) constant «
= 1/137, and c/137 is the classical orbital velocity of the ground state electron.

10
UNCLASSIFIED / / F@ieGPFrtehrt-ese-Oner

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / BORe@EEEGEH=SE-ONnEyY

| ENERGY

Figure 5, Energy Released from Ground State Suppression of Hydrogenic Atom in a Micracavity. (7 =
free-space Bohr orbit radius, fy’ = suppressed Bohr orbit radius, } = resonant wavelength of Bohr orbit, and Eon =
released energy).

Consider the possibility that the decay to a new sub-Bohr ground state would involve
gradual release of energy in the form of heat, rather than a sudden optical radiation
signature. Since the binding energy of the electron is 13.6 eV,® it is estimated that the
amount of energy released in this process could be on the order of 1 to 10 eV for
injection of the hydrogen atom into a Casimir cavity of d = 250 A. Furthermore,
consider the possibility that when the electron exits the cavity it would reabsorb energy
from the zero-point field and be re-excited to its normal state. If these conjectures
were to be verified by experiment, then the energy extracted in the process cames at
the expense of the zero-point field, which in the SED interpretation propagates at the
speed of light throughout the universe. In effect the energy would be extracted locally
and replenished globally. The secondary cansequences on other phenomena, if this
energy conversion were to succeed, have not yet been investigated. However, ona
cautionary note, the conflicts between SED and QED theories (discussed in Section V)
raise questions as to whether the conjectured approach discussed here is viable. This
issue is perhaps best addressed by experiment for its resolution.

In terms of an experimental test, consider using monatomic gases or liquids flowing in
a block with Casimir tunnels, which has the following attributes: 1) no dissociation
pracess is required for monatomic gases or liquids, 2) heavier element atoms are
approximately two to four times larger than hydrogen and thus can utilize and be
affected by a larger Casimir cavity, 3) heavier elements have numerous outer shell
electrons, several of which may be simultaneously affected by the reduction of zero-
point radiation in a Casimir cavity.

All of the noble gas elements contain ns electrons. He (7 = 2,r= 1.2 A) has two is
electrons. Ne (Z = 10, r = 1.3 A) has two each of 1s and 2s electrons. Ar (Z = 18, r=-
1.6 A) has two each of 1s, 2s, and 3s electrons. Kr (Z = 36, r = 1.8 A) has two of each

® 1 eV = 1.602 x 10°!9).

11
UNCLASSIFIED / / F@teOPPPCERE USE ONntr”

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /POROPPRERE ESE Ont

of 1s, 2s, 3s, and 4s electrons. Xe (Z = 54, r = 2.05 A) has two of each of 1s, 2s, 3s,
4s and 5s electrons. Larger Casimir cavities would also be expected to have an effect on
the energetics of the outer electron shells (at larger radii), One could therefore expect
that a Casimir cavity having d = 0.1 um could have an effect on reducing the energy
levels of the outermost pair of s electrons, and possibly also p electrons and
intermediate shell s electrons as well.

Continuing with this model, it is reasonable to expect that a 0.1 pm Casimir cavity could
result in a release of 1 to 10 eV for each injection of a He, Ne, Ar, Kr or Xe atom into
such a cavity. According to Maclay (Reference 26), a long cylindrical Casimir cavity
results in an inward force on the cavity walls due to the exclusion of interior ZPF
modes. In the “exclusion of modes” interpretation of the Casimir force, this implies that
a cylindrical cavity of diameter 0.1 um could yield the desired decay of outer shell
electrons and subsequent release of energy. If one lets the length of the cylinder be
100 times the width, this results in 2 = 10 um for the length of the Casimir tunnel.
Taking advantage of this effect, Puthoff (private communication, 2004) and Haisch and
Moddel (Reference 27) propose a segmented tunnel consisting of alternating conducting
and non-conducting materials, each 10 ym in length. In a length of 1 cm, there could
be 500 such pairs in segments, resulting in 500 energy releases (each yielding 1 to 10
eV) for each transit of an atom through the entire 1 cm-long Casimir tunnel.

Now consider a 1 cm? block that is built up of 10 um thick alternating layers as
described above (see Figure 6 for an illustration of this apparatus). Assume that tunnels
of 0.1 km diameter could be drilled through the cube perpendicular to the layers (this is
not physically possible, of course; tunnel manufacture must be done differently). If 10
percent of the cross sectian comprises entrance to some 1.3 billion tunnels, then the
amount of energy released would be proportional to the flow rate of the gas through
the tunnels (for the number of entrances and exits through Casimir segments). A flow
rate of 10 cm/s through a total cross sectional area of 0.1 cm? yields 1 cm? of gas per
second flowing through the tunnels, which at STP would be 2.7 x 101° atoms. A very
simple sealed, closed-loop pumping system could maintain such a continuous gas flow.
Since each atom interacts 500 times during its passage, there would be 1.3 x 10?
transitions per second in the entire cube of 1 cm?. An energy release of 1 to 10 eV per
transition corresponds to 2,150 to 21,500 W of power released from the entire Casimir
cube of tunnels. This can also be achieved by using a pair of plates with conducting
strips creating Casimir cavities (via 5000 strip pairs) that are separated by 0.1 um
spacers, through which Hg liquid or monatomic gases (for example, He, Ne, Ar, Kr, or
Xe) flow (Reference 27). See Figure 7 for an illustration of this apparatus. However,
again, all of this assumes that the chain of conjectures detailed above is correct.
Fortunately, this can be experimentally tested.

12
UNCLASSIFIED / /602.:05554600ieUG-ONEe=

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /

Figure &. Apparatus for Ground State Figure 7. Alternative Apparatus for Ground State Energy
Energy Suppression: Casimir Seqmented Suppression: Casimir Strip and Spacer-Channels
Tunnels

Microcavity fabrication to match the atomic ground states is daunting because there will
potentially be fabrication irregularities that cause edge and surface effects which act
upon the particles as they enter or exit the Casimir region. And it is not possible to drill
1.3 billion tunnels having diameters of 0.1 um. However, it should be feasible to use
microchip technology to etch holes into the individual layers first and then assemble the
stack. Extremely fine coregistration and alignment of stacks would be an issue, but a
surmountable one. A much smaller number of layer pairs and tunnels would suffice for
a measurable demonstration of release of ZPE by this process. If such a small-scale
demonstration succeeds, larger versions that convert more energy could be built that
also take advantage of more efficient thermal-to-electrical energy conversion methods.
Also if successful, such apparatuses could be used to explore for secondary effects of
converting quantum vacuum energy into thermal, then electrical energy.

Further investigation by Puthoff et al. (Reference 28) was based on the premise that
the above principle is broadly applicable to other than just atomic ground states. In
their experiment, Hz gas was passed through a 1 pm Casimir cavity to suppress the ZPE
radiation at the vibrational ground state of the H2 molecule. The anticipated signature
for such a process would be an increase in the dissociation energy of the molecule.
Initial experiments, shown in Figure 8, were carried out at the Synchrotron Radiation
Center at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, where an intense UV beam is
available to disassociate gas molecules. Unfortunately, problems with the synchrotron
beam (unrelated to the experiment) prevented a definitive result from being obtained,
so the efficacy of this ZPE-extraction approach remains undetermined at the present
time. Further experimentation to investigate this hypothesis has yet to be completed.

13
UNCLASSIFIED / / P@R-O5EIGERESSEORTT™

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / POPC OPPECERE USE OneY

Figure 8. Experimental Apparatus for Ground State Energy Reduction Tests

TUNABLE CASIMIR EFFECT

As previously discussed, the Casimir Effect is a unique ZPF-driven quantum force that
occurs between closely-spaced conductive cavity walls (or plates). If left unfettered, the
plates will collapse together and energy is converted from the ZPF into heat (or other
forms of energy) in accordance with the expression £/A=—n°he/720d*, where E/A is
the energy per unit area of the plates and d is the plate separation. Investigation of this
mechanism by Cole and Puthoff (Reference 11) showed that this process fully obeys
energy conservation and thermodynamic laws.

Although the Casimir force is conservative, and thus the Casimir device might appear to
be a one-shot device, the fact that the attractive Casimir force is weaker for dielectric
plates compared to conductive plates raises the possibility of the use of thin-film
switchable mirrors to obtain a recycling engine (Reference 29-31). Figure 9 shows a
comparison of the strength of the Casimir force in a conductive cavity with that in a
dielectric cavity. In such an application the plates are drawn together by the stronger
ferce associated with the conducting state and withdrawn after switching to the
dielectric state. The engine cycle for this concept is shown in Figure 10. Assuming
optimistic conditions for practical devices (negligible energy required for switching;
plate separation oscillations between 30 nm and 15 nm for 1 cmé plates; driving circuit

14
UNCLASSIFIED / / F@R=@FFEGi ir WGE-O ieee

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / -FO?-O665h-65-0N——

= 10 times the weight of the Casimir plates, and so forth), an estimate of the
achievable power might be obtained. Based on the described parameters, and assuming
a switching from a purely conductive state to a dielectric constant of K = 4, yields a
figure of merit of « 35 x f(MHz) W/kg (f = switching rate) for the power density
(Reference 29). This can be compared to the power density of = 5 W/kg achieved by
current radioisotope thermoelectric generators. The predicted output power per unit
area for this experimental device is = 10-6 f (MHz)/4[d(um)P W/cm?.

Spacing. d (jum)

0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
0 4 4 4 ' +
_ oo Lae =4
§ ~ ° —_
a conductol

Ener gy‘Unit Area x 10!" (Jnr)
7

ta
in
tT

30 _

Figure 9. Tunable Casimir Effect: Conductor vs. Dielectric

15
UNCLASSIFIED / SPOR OPPECREUSE-er

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /P@R-@FFEGRALALSEAOALLY..

Spacing, d (jum)
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 10

Fyy
g
ze,
Bs)
—_——~*

Ener gy: Unit Area x 10! (J/m*)

wane eens iene See

Figure 10. Tunable Casimir Effect: Engine Cycle

Another “tunable” conductive-type plate experiment under consideration involves the
use of plates consisting of three-dimensional photonic crystals, with the bandgap of the
photons that can transmit through the structure being a “tunable” value. Using
microelectromechanical processing methods, Sandia National Laboratory has produced
such crystals and is researching methods of actively modifying the structures while in
use (Reference 32). The technology requirements for this concept are the nano-
fabrication of microcavities with thin-film deposited surfaces, RF-driven piezoelectric
mounts for cavity oscillation, mirror-switching modality (for example, hydrogen
pressure modulation), and calorimetric measurement of energy/heat production.

An initial experiment to explore this concept was recently performed by [annuzzi et al.
(Reference 33). They investigated the effect of hydrogen switchable mirrors (HSMs) on
the Casimir force. HSMs are shiny metals in their “as deposited” state. However, when

' they are exposed to a hydrogen-rich atmosphere, they become optically transparent.
Because the electromagnetic ZPF depends on the optical properties of the surfaces, the
Casimir force of attraction between two HSMs in air should be different than the
attraction between the same HSMs immersed in a hydrogen-rich atmosphere, That is
because one expects that the Casimir force will be much weaker when the HSM is in the

16
UNCLASSIFIED / OR OPPECER USE ONnrTT”

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /#6R-@FFE6GR=6GE-ONEY

transparent state rather than in the reflective state. The experiment tested this for
plate separations of 70 - 400 nm.

Iannuzzi et al.’s experimental results showed that the Casimir force did not noticeably
decrease after filling the experimental apparatus with hydrogen. This may have
occurred for two reasons. First, the dielectric properties of the HSMs used in the
experiment are only known only in a limited range of wavelengths spanning 0.3 - 2.5
um, while the experiment measured the transparency of the HSMs over a wavelength
range of 0.5 - 3 um. This narrower wavelength span excludes the rest of the
electromagnetic ZPF modes having wavelengths shorter than 0.5 jm and longer than 3
um. The ZPF modes lying outside this narrow wavelength span were not affected by the
hydrogenation-induced transparency of the HSMs, hence their contribution to the total
Casimir force acting between the HSMs was not included. One would expect to see a
significant decrease of the Casimir force if the hydrogenation-induced transparency of
the HSMs had affected all of the ZPF mode wavelengths ranging from IR to UV (ZPF
modes with 4 >> 2.5 um will not give rise to large contributions to the force). Second,
the experiment demonstrated a property of the Lifshitz theory (see Reference 33 for
more detail), that in order to significantly change the Casimir force between surfaces at
separations on the order of 100 nm it is not sufficient just to change their optical (IR
and visible) reflectivity, but it is necessary to modify their dielectric functions over a
much wider spectral range. This comports with the first reason, and indicates that more
theoretical and experimental work is needed to overcome the shortcomings of this
experiment, and allow for the design and testing of new experiments that can achieve
Casimir plate transparency over a wider spectral range.

A notion similar to the tunable Casimir Effect involves changing the dimensions of a
rectangular “Casimir box.” Forward (Reference 34) proposed a paradox in which energy
could be extracted by altering the aspect ratio of a conductive rectangular Casimir
cavity over a specific cycle of dimension changes (for example, varying width while
holding length constant). It was subsequently shown by Maclay (Reference 26, 35),
that the Casimir energy inside the box is not isotropic, varying in such a way that more
work is expended in cycling the box dimensions than can be extracted. It appears that
no net gain of energy is theoretically possible in this scheme. Whether such
considerations apply to the tunable Casimir cavity concept remains to be assessed.

EV PHENOMENON

Shoulders (Reference 36) developed an experimental program to explore the physics of
microscopic plasma vortices (aka force-free plasmoids), which are thought to be a form
of ball lightning (Reference 37). This study was motivated by the earlier experimental
work of Wells at the Princeton University Plasma Physics Laboratory, Bostick and Nardi
at the Stevens Inst. of Technology, and their collaborators (Reference 38-45).
Shoulders became interested in the possibility of stable, quantized force-free structures
that could be taken apart by some process to yield a net energy gain for power
generation. The foundation for this speculation was Nardi et al.’s (Reference 45)
observation of strange electron concentrations they called vortex filaments that formed
in an electron beam made by plasma focus or relativistic electron beam machines,
which exhibited electron concentrations that appeared to violate the space charge law.
Furthermore, Nardi et al. observed that the vortex filaments were striking exposed
materials (for example, metals, dielectrics, ceramics, glass), boring smooth channels
straight through them, and sometimes exploding with such a large force that they

17
UNCLASSIFIED / /POT"OFFtGHAL=J55-0NLY..

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /#@R-05F1650-U65-6Ne=

created impact craters or holes in the materials. Piestrup et al. (Reference 46)
performed more recent experiments to investigate this unusual phenomenon. This
discovery inspired Shoulders to consider vortex filaments as a potential new source of
energy, and hence he named them electromagnetic vortices or “EVs.” However, given
that he could not experimentally verify the vortex nature of the phenomenon, he later
redefined EV to mean Electrum Validum (roughly translated as strong electron).

Bostick and Shoulders began collaborating and realized that EVs were much easier to
generate and observe using micro-arc discharge devices because they are usually
obscured by surrounding plasma in large high-power plasma machines. This led
Shoulders to design a series of low-voltage, low-power micro-arc discharge (or
condensed-charge emission) devices to produce EVs in the lab. Figure 11 shows a
schematic diagram for one embodiment of an EV (pulse discharge source) device. The
EVs are generated at the cathode tip and then follow the path (dashed line above the
dielectric) to the impact site on the ground plane (in the figure, C = capacitor and V =
voltage). The EVs generated by such devices were able to reproduce the material
damage observed in Nardi et al.’s earlier experiments.

-V

—_—<— CATHODE
PATH
\ Sma “~

DIELECTRIC A -—_ IMPACT SITE

CC —_——_— GROUND PLANE

Figure 11. Schematic of EV (Pulse Discharge Source) Device (Reference 47)

18
UNCLASSIFIED / / P@teOPPtetrr esr eneer

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /F@R-OPFPECERE USE ONC

Figure 12 shows a scanning electron microscope (SEM) photograph of the damage
inflicted by a single EV burst fired along an aluminum-oxide ceramic plate. The EV
bored through the ceramic forming a smooth symmetrical channel along its path.

Figure 12. SEM of EV Damage to Ceramic Plate (20 um scale) (Reference 36)

19
UNCLASSIFIED / (B@feOFERICHEU6E-ONE—

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /(F@R-@EEtGEAL-UGE-Oal Aa

Figure 13 shows a SEM photo of a single EV shot on a Palladium (Pd) target from a 46
pF capacitor charged to 3,000 Valts (containing 7.5 x 101! electrons). At least 100 tiny
craters were formed in the target. The larger craters formed in the Pd target as seen in
the photo suggest a very energetic impact that melted the Pd locally, making a small
hole surrounded by a crater wall.

Figure 13. SEM of EV Damage to Palladium Target (Reference 36)

20
UNCLASSIFIED / / F@R=@665GR4i21SE.ONLY,

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /FOROPPrera eer ony

Figure 14 shows an example of an EV moving away from its source and shedding
electrons while giving off light as it was decaying.

B!.00.:9. 9:

Figure 14. EV (large blob at bottom) Moving at Downward Angle Away From Its Source (smaller blob
near center of photo) (Reference 36)

Shoulders’ experimental studies claim that EVs have physical characteristics
corresponding to the phenomenon observed by Nardi et al. His conclusions were that
EVs are compact spherically shaped balls (diameter = 1 - 20 um) of condensed high-
density charge (~ 107° electrons/m?) with an internal electric field > 108 V/m, a charge-
to-mass ratio of 1.7588 x 101! Coulomb/kg (= electron’s charge-to-mass ratio), and a
surface current density of 6 x 1015 Amps/m? (Reference 36). Shoulders also reported
that EVs are a source of (copious) X-rays; a single EV discharge gun can produce
multiple EVs in which the coupling between adjacent EVs produces quasi-stable
structures (chains); and EVs respond like an electron under deflection by external fields
of known polarity.

Since electrons would not be expected to bind together due to their mutual Coulomb
repulsion, a speculative model based on the vacuum electromagnetic ZPF was formed

21
UNCLASSIFIED / / F@}@PEEGHI=6E-One

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /POteOTrrtre vst ort

to explain the existence of EVs. The emerging laboratory evidence led investigators to
consider the hypothesis that the Casimir effect may be a major contributing mechanism
to the formation of EVs in micro-arc discharges. This conjecture is based on models by
Casimir (Reference 48) and Puthoff and Piestrup (Reference 49) suggesting that the
generation of a relatively cold, dense, non-neutral (charged) plasma results in charge-
condensation effects that may be attributable to a Casimir-type pinch effect (that is,
ZPF-induced pressure forces) in which the inverse square-law Coulomb repulsion is
overcome by an attractive inverse fourth-law Casimir force to yield a stable
configuration of bound charges at small dimensions. This is a derivative of Casimir’s
semi-classical mode! of the electron in which a dense shell-like distribution of charge
might suppress vacuum fields in the interior of the shell (Reference 48). However,
initial application of Casimir’s model found that the vacuum field inside the modeled
electron was found to augment rather than offset the divergent Coulomb field thus
rendering the electron’s self-energy divergent. Puthoff (Reference 50) later resolved
this problem by developing a self-consistent vacuum-fluctuation-based model in which
the net contribution to the point-like electron’s self-energy by its Coulomb and vacuum
fields vanishes thus rendering a stable finite-mass electron.

Shoulders and collaborators subsequently investigated different approaches to
extracting useful energy from the vacuum ZPF by way of exploiting EV phenomenon.
Even though EVs can be easily produced in the lab, efforts to test this hypothesis have
not met with success due to technical problems. However, this topic is ideal to pursue
for future research.

V. Theoretical Considerations and Issues
QED VACUUM REVISITED

QED Vacuum as a Plenum

Continued theoretical and experimental research has revealed that the vacuum
constitutes an active agent that contributes to a host of phenomena ranging from
microscopic level shifts of atomic states to possible connections to the cause of
cosmological expansion (Reference 14, 51). As more of its attributes are explored, the
vacuum has been found to exhibit phenomena characteristic of an optical medium, such
as induced birefringence in the presence of an applied magnetic field (Reference 52),
and breakdown (decay) in the presence of external electric fields (Reference 53-55).
The current view is that the vacuum has structure, and can be considered much like a
medium of classical physics. However, the vacuum differs significantly from that of a
classical medium due to the existence of quantum fluctuations. A primary attribute of
quantum theory is the concept of matter and field fluctuations, rooted in Heisenberg’s
Uncertainty Principle.

In second-quantized QED theory, the theory that applies to the electromagnetic
vacuum, the canonical approach to representing fluctuations of the free vacuum
electromagnetic field is to express the field distribution in terms of standing- or
traveling-wave normal modes. Section I suggested that the large value of the
integrated ZPE density fuels the concept of potentially useful vacuum energy conversion
to other forms, should even some small part of the spectral energy distribution be
accessible for conversion by technological means.

22
UNCLASSIFIED / /POROFFPICTAD USE ONtT

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / P@PRoOPS2GERE-6E-OhLY

QED Vacuum as a Mathematical “Placeholder” for Fluctuating Matter
Fields

The treatment of the QED vacuum as a fluctuating plenum with (formally) infinite
energy density has caused some physicists to call into question the viability of the
second-quantized QED formalism. Jaynes, for example, in considering the
consequences for calculation of the Lamb shift of the 2s level of the hydrogen atom
under the assumption of a much more modest electron Compton frequency cutoff (~
1071 Hz), calculates a fluctuating power flow for the Poynting vector of 6 x 1029 MW/cm2
- comparable in every square centimeter to the total power output of the sun - and
states that “real radiation of that intensity would do a little more than just shift the 2s
level by 4 microvolts” (Reference 56). However, despite alternatives to the formalism of
QED that have been suggested (more on this later), second-quantized QED cannot be
lightly dismissed; and this is so even though the infinities that must be dealt with by
such procedures as renormalization caused even one of its founders, Paul Dirac, to
remark: “This is just not sensible mathematics. Sensible mathematics involves
neglecting a quantity when it turns out to be small — not neglecting it because it is
infinitely great and you do not want it” (Reference 57),

A second argument that can be raised against using the QED formalism to further
explore vacuum fluctuation physics is that, despite the magnitude of the energy density
potentially associated with vacuum electromagnetic fluctuations, observation of the
cosmological constant—a measure of net vacuum energy density—has a value that is
only on the order of the average energy density of (ordinary + dark) matter in the
universe = 10-9 J/m? (Reference 58, 59). This leads to what is often referred to as the
120 orders-of-magnitude problem, or “cosmological coincidence.” In the mainstream
view, rather than the QED value being discounted, the resolution of this problem is
thought to lie in the domain of infinity (or divergent integral) cancellations, requiring
instead an accounting for the fine-tuning requirements of such cancellations (Reference
60, 61).

Again, the root cause of the difficulties that accompany second quantization of the
vacuum field is that an unbounded plenum possesses an infinite number of degrees of
freedom, each with its assigned ground-state fluctuation energy. In an attempt to
circumvent the difficulties associated with an unbounded, second-quantized plenum,
alternative approaches to QED have been explored in the literature in some detail, a
few of which are discussed in Section V. A number of these alternative viewpoints
interpret the second-quantized QED vacuum with its infinite degrees of freedom as
simply an over-idealized mathematical placeholder for “real” fields that originate in
matter fluctuations whose number of degrees of freedom is necessarily always limited.
Nevertheless, though the alternative formalisms and associated interpretations differ
significantly from the canonical approach, detailed calculations yield results identical to
those generated by the second-quantized field formalism. As a result, even treated as a
mathematical placeholder for matter fluctuation fields, at this point in our discussion
the QED value must be taken seriously. The proposed corollary concerning the
potentially significant conversion of QED vacuum energy to other forms is further
evaluated in the sections that follow.

23
UNCLASSIFIED / / hin @ERbGidbld ileal

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / SF @R-@EFEGH ALGER Db

CASIMIR EFFECT REVISITED

The most-quoted quintessential configuration for the conversion of vacuum energy to
other forms of enérgy is the Casimir effect. As previously discussed, when parallel
conducting plates are placed in a vacuum, they attract one another by a very weak
force that varies inversely as the fourth power of the distance between them. First
computed by Casimir in terms of van der Waals forces (a matter-fields approach — see
below), he soon realized that, because the force turns out to be independent of the
molecular details of the conductors, it could be computed as a problem in vacuum
energy, and that is the way it is now generally presented in the literature (the “plenum
approach”) (Reference 5, 62).

Casimir Effect in the Plenum Picture

One begins with the free quantum vacuum electromagnetic field fluctuations, and then
determines their modification due to the insertion of two parallel plane conductors (that
is, plates) as additional boundary conditions, which constrain a discrete set of intra-
cavity modes of integer half-wavelengths. Aside from an unobservable, high-frequency-
cutoff-dependent, free-field term that remains from the mathematical regularization

procedure, the resulting (renormalized) vacuum stress-energy tensor? is given by
(re) ={ he / 720d" )diag(-1,1,1,-3), where the angular brackets denote the quantum

(vacuum state) expectation value of the tensor 7", d is the plate separation, and

diag(-1,1,1,-3) denotes the diagonal elements of a 4x4 matrix (Reference 1-3, 62).1°
(7) represents the real physical stress carried by the vacuum field fluctuations in the

Not

presence of the parallel plane conductors, and it encodes the Casimir effect in terms of
(1) an interaction energy per unit area, F/ A=~—n'he/720d", and (2) a corresponding

force per unit area, F/A=-n'hc/ 240d". If free to move in response to the attractive
Casimir force, the motion of the plates toward each other is understood in the plenum
approach to progressively eliminate intra-cavity modes, converting their associated
ground-state energies first into kinetic energy, and then, upon collision of the plates,
into heat. Section II described the Casimir-force-driven collapse of Forward’s charged
slinky as a Casimir-type configuration for building up an electric field to charge a
battery, and how such processes were shown not to violate either conservation of
energy or thermodynamic constraints.

Casimir Effect in the Fluctuating Matter Fields Picture

Complementary to the vacuum mode description (plenum approach), the Casimir effect
can be described, like van der Waals attraction, as arising from correlations in the state
of electrons in the two plates through the intermediary of their coupled fields. From this
standpoint (matter-fields approach) there is no requirement for the high energy density
vacuum field of the plenum approach to reside throughout all space.

® The stress-energy-momentum tensor, 7*", is a matrix quantity that encodes the density and flux of a matter
source's energy and momentum. Greek indices denote the matrix components over the spacetime coordinates.

'? For this derivation, the vacuum fluctuations of other quantum fields are essentially undisturbed by the presence
of the conductors or are affected only in the immediate vicinity of the atomic nuclei that they contain.

24
UNCLASSIFIED / /0-2.0555654i-06-00iir ==

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / POPoOP PEGE USE Oh

Unfortunately with regard to energy generation, though the Casimir forces involved can
be of significance for MEMS applications (Reference 63), the associated Casimir
energies involved are too small to be considered of significance for energy applications,
so if the possibility for vacuum energy conversion exists, one must look elsewhere to
other types of matter-vacuum interactions.

TYPE I (TRANSIENT) AND TYPE II (CONTINUOUS) MACHINES

A key feature of the Casimir process just described, regardless of viewpoint (plenum or
matter-fields), is that it is a “one-shot,” transient, energy-producing machine. That is,
after delivering its energy, E, the matter that comprises the machine is in a “used”
state (this used matter is commonly referred to as “ash”) and cannot be restored to the
original state without an input of energy that is greater than or equal to &. This “one-
shot” feature can be generalized to define a category of machine called a Type I
transient machine, with the Casimir machine constituting the prototypical
representative. Should gravitation eventually be traced to a vacuum ZPF origin as
proposed by Sakharov (Reference 64), then the fall of an object of mass m through a
height A in a gravitational field (g = acceleration of gravity at Earth’s surface),
delivering its gravitational energy mgh upon impact with the ground, would constitute
another example.

In contrast, one can envision a Type II (continuous) machine in which vacuum ZPF
energy is converted to a useful form on a recycling basis without net alteration to its
own matter state. A hypothetical example is the tunable Casimir device that was
reviewed in Section IV. The cycle of energy generation would consist of the collapse of
conducting plates with delivery of energy, followed by separation of plates switched to
insulating mode for which the attractive force is considerably weaker, only to be
switched back to conducting mode for the next cycle, and so forth. Provided the input
switching energy required per cycle is less than the output energy delivered per cycle, a
continuous generation of energy without a net change in matter configuration would
result. A second example would be a nonlinear oscillator that continuously, on a steady-
state basis, down-shifted high-frequency components of the vacuum ZPF spectrum to
lower frequencies for convenient collection and application, without a net change in its
own operation.

Clearly a Type II machine would be far more useful than a Type I machine for energy
extraction. Type II machines would constitute a fuel-less energy source, with the
ambient vacuum ZPF providing essentially unlimited energy. For this to be the case,
however, another requirement needs to be satisfied, which the next section will
address.

DEGRADABILITY OF THE VACUUM

The possibility of continuous conversion of vacuum ZPE to other forms (that is, by a
Type II machine) requires that, in principle, vacuum energy must be degradable (that
is, continuously consumable), not just that there be a surfeit of energy in place to
harvest. This perspective leads to a remarkable question for deeper explorations of
QED. It turns out that the mathematical structure of QED is based on a formalism in
which the vacuum mode structure and vacuum fluctuation. energy per mode are
quantized in what could be called a “hard-wired” fashion; that is, they possess fixed
immutable values. Therefore, at the end of a cycle of a hypothetical Type II machine, in

25
UNCLASSIFIED / (POROPPrrerre esr errr”

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / POR °OPF2CRE SSE oh

which both matter and vacuum mode structure have been returned to their original
states, the vacuum modes must of necessity contain at a minimum the same, “hard-
wired,” energetic content as before the cycle. Therefore, assuming local detailed-
balance energy conservation, continuous conversion of vacuum ZPE to other forms via
a Type II machine is, from the QED viewpoint, forbidden in principle since the vacuum
as described by the QED formalism is non-degradable. (Globally, vacuum energy is not
conserved during cosmological expansion, with work being done by the negative
vacuum pressure to maintain positive constant vacuum energy density and therefore
increasing the vacuum energy (Reference 65) This outcome of second-quantized QED
theory permits of but two interpretations with regard to continuous vacuum energy
conversion: 1) QED theory, despite criticisms that can be leveled against it, is correct in
its description of vacuum fluctuation dynamics, and even though vacuum ZPE exists, it
cannot be continuously converted to other forms, or 2) the axiomatic inconvertibility is
an artifact of an over-idealized mathematical structure, and therefore the possibility of
conversion remains an open question.!! What is not in question, however, is that QED,
as an axiomatic, quantum formalism based on the concept of an immutable, non-
degradable vacuum, does not support the concept of continuous vacuum energy
conversion.

ALTERNATIVES TO QED

As noted in Section V, despite its successes the second-quantized QED formalism with
its infinite vacuum degrees of freedom and associated infinite energy density has been
the subject of criticism and, as a result, alternatives have been proposed and
investigated in the literature. The alternatives run the gamut from neoclassical theories
in which matter is quantized but the fields are not (for example, the voluminous work of
E. T. Jaynes), through classical theories where both matter and fields are treated
classically, with vacuum fluctuations fields taken to be real but of a classical nature (for
example, SED}, to formalisms which eliminate the concept of vacuum fields altogether
(for example, direct-action approaches investigated by A. O. Barut and others; see the
references cited below). Each of these will be examined briefly with regard to the
possibility of useful “vacuum energy conversion.”

Neoclassical Theories of QED Vacuum Fluctuation Effects

A major proponent of the neoclassical approach has been E. T. Jaynes, who has
questioned whether the quantized vacuum field is physically real or merely an artifice of
the second-quantized QED formalism. Based on the fact that the QED formalism
permits expression of effects in terms of quantized “self” or “source” fields as an
alternative to expression in terms of quantized vacuum fluctuation fields, Jaynes
advanced the hypothesis that QED effects can be attributed to the self-fields of
quantized matter without considering independent quantization of the vacuum fields,
expressions in terms of the latter just being a placeholder for the former. Pointedly,
with regard to QED being “the jewel of physics because of its extremely accurate
predictions,” Jaynes’ position is that “those accurate experimental confirmations of QED
come from the local source fields, which are coherent with the local state of matter,”
and that “the quantized free field only tags along (Reference 66).” Jaynes nonetheless
arrived at a conclusion that one might call Jaynes’ Axiom, namely, “This complete

"’ A number of publications by €. T. Jaynes, A. O. Barut and their collaborators are based on the premise that
second quantization is an unnecessary artifact of an over-idealized formalism.

26
UNCLASSIFIED / /POROFFICTAL USE ONLY

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / B@R=@5EGEAL-6-ONE—

interchangeability of source-field effects and vacuum-fluctuation effects...shows that
source-field effects are the same as if vacuum fluctuations were present.” Applied to
the case of a radiating atom, Jaynes provides a specific example of his conclusion with
the statement “The radiating atom is indeed interacting with an electromagnetic field of
the intensity predicted by the zero-point energy, but this is just the atom’s own
radiation reaction field (Reference 67).” As a result, with the axiomatic second-
quantized field formalism set aside, in the neoclassical approach any consideration of
the conversion of vacuum ZPE for use must be displaced to consideration of the
conversion and degradability of source or matter-fields fluctuation energy for use,
issues yet to be addressed in the literature.

SED Model Revisited

SED is a classical (that is, non-quantized) theory of particle-field interactions that
assumes the existence of classical particles and a classical random background
electromagnetic field distribution whose Lorentz-invariant spectral energy density is
chosen to match that originally appearing in second-quantized QED. Given SED’‘s
heuristic value of classical-like modeling and ease of calculation and its seeming ability
to address many quantum mechanical problems with success (as outlined in Section
III), the SED approach has been employed in the literature to explore vacuum energy
conversion. In the absence of a formalism for vacuum field quantization, there are no
fundamental immutability constraints that would mitigate against vacuum energy
degradability, so that issue is not testable under this formalism.

Investigations to date have included the use of cavity-QED techniques to suppress
atomic or molecular ground states (Reference 28), and evaluation of the use of a
nonlinear oscillator to continuously downshift high-frequency components of the
vacuum fluctuation spectrum to lower frequencies for convenient collection and use.
With regard to the latter, the result of a nonrelativistic SED analysis is that the
downshifting process acts to convert an initial hypothetical cubic-frequency vacuum
fluctuation spectrum towards a Rayleigh-Jeans rather than a Planck heat spectrum (the
former being a low energy approximation of the latter) (Reference 68, 69). Extension of
the analysis to the relativistic regime does not alter this conclusion (Reference 70, 71).
Though further work remains, these considerations lead one to conclude that SED in its
present form is incomplete, and may not be useful for the assessment of the potential
conversion of vacuum energy to other forms; its predictions concerning such must be
treated with caution.

Additional shortcomings of the SED madel include convoluted attempts to derive
interference effects or Schrédinger’s equation, and the difficulty in explaining sharply-
defined stationary states (that is, sharp atomic spectra), though there have been many
attempts (Reference 17). QED and SED do not in general yield the same results for
nonlinear systems, although they are in agreement for the range of linear systems
examined. The apparent disagreements between SED and QED are quite serious, and
occur in areas in which QED is highly successful. Perhaps the source of these difficulties
lies in accurately dealing with the nonlinear stochastic differential equations in SED for
these problems. Even still, it is likely that differences will rernain, which should clearly
be testable by experimental means (Reference 72). For a very thorough, detailed and
scholarly review of SED, see (Reference 17) and the corresponding review by Cole and
Rueda (Reference 73).

27
UNCLASSIFIED / /G@2.6.2546001i006-ORie

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / APO@R-@FF2GriinGE-Galae

Given the heuristic value of certain aspects of SED modeling, but with the shortcomings
outlined above noted, SED theorists de la Pena and Cetto have proposed a modification
to SED they call LSED (linear SED) (Reference 74). The modification consists of the
addition of three new constraining principles that result in a farm of convergence with
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics while retaining some of the appealing attributes of
standard SED (for example, quantum states being stable on the basis of a dynamic
balance between absorption and emission of background vacuum fluctuation fields).
The added constraints (for example, an added constraint that invokes detailed energy
balance for separate frequencies) result in correcting several known problems with
standard SED. For example, now the equilibrium spectrum is Planck’s, not Rayleigh-
Jeans, and wavelike behavior of matter and nonlocality issues can be addressed, and so
forth. The issue of continuous vacuum energy conversion has yet to be addressed in
this new formalism, however, so that remains for the future.

QED Without Second-Quantized Fields

As yet another alternative to canonical second-quantized QED, Barut (Reference 75)
has proposed that effects attributable to vacuum ZPF can be derived with a theory in
which there are source (matter) fluctuation fields but no vacuum fluctuation fields, and
that even the former can be eliminated. Barut’s approach is developed in considerable
detail as an independent, self-consistent, formulation of QED in its own right. Barut
argues that effects normally attributed to vacuum fluctuations in the second-quantized,
linear theory of the radiation field can be equally well computed within the framework
of a non-second-quantized, nonlinear theory which is based entirely on matter wave
functions alone. His program is to assess how far one can go in understanding radiative
processes without second quantization or vacua that fluctuate. Barut and his
collaborators have successfully applied the theory to the Lamb shift and spontaneous
emission (Reference 76, 77}, problems of cavity QED (Reference 78), Casimir-Polder
and van der Waals forces (Reference 79), calculations of the electron’s ge~2 factor

(Reference 80-82),!2 and the Davies-Unruh effect (Reference 83) among others.

Given that the formalism of second-quantized field operators are not used at all in the
Barut approach, the seemingly quantized properties of fields are taken to simply reflect
first quantization of the sources. Therefore, in the absence of the independent existence
of second-quantized field fluctuations, the QED arguments concerning immutability and
nondegradability of quantized vacuum fluctuation fields, and the corollary proscription
against potential conversion of energy from such fields, do not apply. As in the
neoclassical approach, the question of the conversion of quantum ZPE to other forms
must be diverted to consideration of the global properties of matter fluctuation
interactions in the as-yet-incomplete development of the Barut approach.

EXAMPLES OF DEGRADABLE OF DECAYING VACUUM

In closing, several examples of a degradable vacuum that are predicted by quantum
field theory, quantum field theory in curved spacetime, and the Standard Model of
elementary particle physics will be reviewed. It turns out that the vacuum in QED
theory is in fact degradable in spite of its “hardwired” ZPF modes.

12 », is the electron’s gyromagnetic ratio.

28
UNCLASSIFIED / / F@PeO@PPrerTar usr oOnNtr

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /®O Re OPSS68RE OSE OnNtTT”

Gravitational Squeezing of the Vacuum

In their study of traversable wormholes, Hochberg and Kephart (Reference 84)
discovered that the gravitational field of any astronomical body produces a zone of
negative energy around it by “dragging” some of the virtual quanta (a.k.a. vacuum
ZPF) downward. They applied their discovery to the problem of creating and stabilizing
traversable wormholes. Their quantum optics analysis showed that there is a distortion
of the vacuum electromagnetic ZPF due to the interaction with a prescribed
gravitational background, which results in “squeezed” vacuum states that possess 4
negative energy density. Squeezing of the vacuum is a quantum process that is roughly
analogous to the compression of an ordinary fluid. This means that as the vacuum field
is continuously being squeezed by the gravitational field of a body, its energy is
continuously being degraded with respect to the undisturbed remote vacuum field.

The magnitude of the gravitational squeezing of the vacuum can be estimated from the
quantum optics squeezing condition for given transverse (to the direction of
gravitational acceleration) momentum and (equivalent) energy eigenvalues, j =
8nrs/2,13 of two electromagnetic ZPF field modes, subject to the squeezing condition j
—+ 0, where a4 is the ZPF made wavelength and rs is the Schwarzschild radius of the
astronomical body under study (Reference 84).14 This condition simply states that
substantial gravitational squeezing of the vacuum occurs for ZPF field modes with 4 >
8xrs. The corresponding local vacuum state energy density that this effect produces is
PE-gsvac = —2n2yc/24,

It is not clear whether this mechanism can be exploited to extract energy from the
vacuum. Conservation of energy suggests one of two possible outcomes: 1) the lost
energy is injected into the gravitational energy of the body, or 2) the lost energy
reappears as an accumulation of positive energy density ZPF modes elsewhere in the
universe. Further research will be needed to address this question.

Redshifting the Vacuum

Calloni et al. (Reference 85, 86) explored the possibility of verifying the equivalence
principle for the zero-point energy of QED. They used semi-classical quantum gravity
theory to evaluate the net force produced by the quantum vacuum ZPF acting on a rigid
Casimir cavity in a weak gravitational field which is modeled using the standard
Schwarzschild spacetime metric geometry.!5 They evaluated the regularized (or

renormalized) stress-energy tensor (7) of the quantized vacuum electromagnetic field

between two plane-parallel ideal metallic plates lying in a horizontal plane. (rx)

encodes the Casimir effect, which has a negative energy density and a negative
pressure along the vertical (gravitational acceleration) axis between the plates, Bimonte

13 Note that j contains an extra factor of two (compared to the j derived in Reference 84) In order to account for
the photon spin,

14 ys = 2GM/c? is the critical radius at which a body of mass Mf collapses into a black hale. It is used here as a
convenient distance parameter to simplify the inequality, but there is no actual black hole collapse invalved in this
mechanism. G is Newton‘s universal gravitation constant (6.673 x 10 '! Nm?/kg?).

15 & spacetime metric is a Lorentz-invariant distance function between any two points in spacetime, which is
defined in terms of a metric tensor, Q.., that encodes the geometry of spacetime (Greek indices ,v = 0...3 denote
spacetime coordinates, x°...x3, such that x'_.x? = space coordinates and x° = time coordinate).

29
UNCLASSIFIED / /®#@GPERCIRE USL Ont

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / F@R-@FF26RAL-U6E-ONEY

et al. (Reference 87-89) also studied this problem using Green-function techniques in
the Schwinger-DeWitt quantum ether prescription for (72) in a curved spacetime. The

results from these studies agreed with the equivalence principle and showed that
quantum vacuum ZPF does gravitate since the energy of each ZPF mode is redshifted
by the factor (-g00)/4 = [1 — (2GM/c?r)]/? even though the modes remain unchanged
(M is the mass of a gravitating body, r is the radial distance from the body, and goo is
the time-time component of the Schwarzschild metric tensor).

These studies suggest that cavity electromagnetic vacuum states are continuously
degrading inside a background gravitational field. The total energy (Ecucmay) stored in the
Casimir device is given by (Reference 87, 89):

wAhef, Sed
Gry = —| 1+-— J

where A is the area of the plates, ¢ is their separation, and g is the acceleration of
gravity at Earth’s surface (9.81 m/s2}. But can one extract energy from this
mechanism? The answer to this question is not known at present, but consideration of
the conservation of energy suggests that the same two possible outcomes given in the
previous section would seem to apply: 1) the lost energy is injected into the
gravitational energy of the body, or 2) the lost energy reappears as positive energy
density ZPF modes elsewhere in the universe. Further research will be needed to
address this question as weil.

Vacuum Field Stress: Negative Vacuum Energy from the Casimir
Effect

As this report has already discussed, the standard Casimir effect (neglecting spacetime
curvature, a.k.a. background gravitational fields) is by far the easiest and most well
known way to produce negative vacuum energy. Therefore, the vacuum within certain
types of Casimir cavity geometries is degraded. It turns out that there are many
different types of Casimir effects found in quantum field theory (Reference 1-3, 62, 90).
For example, if one introduces a single infinite plane conductor into the Minkowski (flat
spacetime) vacuum by bringing it adiabatically from infinity so that whatever quantum
fields are present suffer no excitation but remain in their ground states, then the
vacuum (electromagnetic) stresses induced by the presence of the infinite plane
conductor produces a Casimir effect. This result holds equally well when two parallel
plane conductors (with separation distance d) are present, which gives rise to the
familiar Casimir effect inside a cavity. Note that in both cases, the spacetime manifold
is made incomplete by the introduction of the plane conductor boundary condition(s).
The vacuum region put under stress by the presence of the plane conductor(s) is called
the “Casimir vacuum.” The generic expression for the energy density of the Casimir
vacuum is p,, =-Aphed’, where Ap = C(D)/8x? in spacetimes of arbitrary dimension D
(Reference 1-3). The appearance of the zeta-function ¢(D) is characteristic of
expressions for vacuum stress-energy tensors, 7". In our familiar 4-dimensional
spacetime (D = 4), Ap = x°/720. To calculate 7" for a given quantum field is to
calculate its associated Casimir effect.

30
UNCLASSIFIED / (POR CPPIETAE USE ONE

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / S@R-@66EGDAL-UG-OAlLL ae

When the plates in a Casimir cavity are put into non-uniform accelerated motion, it is
possible in principle to create real photons out of the vacuum. This effect is referred to
in the literature as the “dynamical Casimir effect,” or motion-induced radiation
(Reference 62, 91). One version of the dynamical Casimir effect provides a way to
degrade the vacuum whereby negative vacuum energy is produced by a single moving
reflecting (conducting) surface (a.k.a. a moving mirror). A mirror moving with
increasing acceleration generates a flux of negative vacuum energy that emanates from
its surface and flows out into the space ahead of the mirror (Reference 4, 92). This is
essentially the simple case of an infinite plane conductor undergoing acceleration
perpendicular to its surface. If the acceleration varies with time, the conductor will
generally emit or absorb photons (that is, exchange energy with the vacuum), even
though it is neutral. This is an example of the well-known quantum phenomenon of
parametric excitation. The parameters of the electromagnetic field oscillators (for
example, their frequency distribution function) change with time owing to the
acceleration of the mirror (Reference 93).

Analogs of the Casimir effect also exist for fields other than the electromagnetic field.
When considering the vacuum state of other fields, one must consider boundary
conditions that are analogous to the perfect-conductor boundary conditions for the
electromagnetic field at the surfaces of the plates (Reference 1-3, 62, 91}. Other fields
are not electromagnetic.in nature; that is to say they are non-Maxwellian, and so the
perfect-conductor boundary conditions do not apply to them. It turns out that complete
manifolds exhibit what is called the “topological Casimir effect” for any non-Maxwellian
fields. In order to define boundary conditions for other fields replace the conductor
boundary conditions and Minkowski spacetime by a manifold of the form x = (that is,
a product space), where X is the real line defining the time dimension for this particular
product space and ¢ is a flat 3-dimensional manifold having any one of the following
topologies: 3%? x S!, 9 x T?, T3, ® x K2, and so forth, ® being the real line that defines
any linear space dimension (for example, ® = line, 91? = 2-dimensional plane), T being
the n-torus, K2 the 2-dimensional Klein bottle, S! the circle, and so forth.

The case X = st? x S! has the closest resemblance to the electromagnetic Casimir effect,
the difference being that instead of imposing conductor boundary conditions, one
imposes periodic boundary conditions on some of the space coordinates in the 3-
dimensional manifold. When imposing this topological constraint on the field theoretic
calculation of the topological Casimir effect (for linear massless fields), one finds that

the generic expression for the energy density is also p,,. =-A,,hed~’, where

Ar =td,(n° /90) , d; is the number of degrees of freedom (for example, helicity states)

per spatial point, the plus sign holds for boson fields (giving a negative energy density)
and the negative sign for fermion fields (giving a positive energy density).

If one were to admit spin structure in the manifolds described above and the field is
spinorial, then there is another important subtlety that must be taken into account

when evaluating 7!" . However, this introduces an additional complexity involving the

relationship between the spin structure and the global structure (that is, the
configuration space or fibre bundle) of the field in question whereby the topology not

only of the base manifold, but of the fibre bundle itself has an effect on 7" . In addition
to this, there are (compactified) extra-space dimensional quantum field (that is, D-

31
UNCLASSIFIED / /POROTTRCIAL USE Oh

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / (POR CPPECHH-US= CN

Brane or “brane world”) analogs of the Casimir effect yet to be explored. But a detailed
consideration of these is beyond the scope of this report and will be left for future
investigation.

Squeezed Quantum Vacuum

It was discovered in 1965 that quantum field theory has the remarkable property of
allowing states of matter containing local regions of negative (vacuum state) energy
density or negative fluxes (Reference 94). In general, the local (vacuum state) energy
density in quantum field theory can be negative due to quantum coherence effects
(Reference 94). A primary byproduct of this discovery is the “squeezed quantum
vacuum,” which later gave rise to new phenomenon such as the gravitationally
squeezed vacuum discussed previously. Substantial theoretical and experimental work
has shown that in many quantum systems the limits to measurement precision imposed
by the quantum vacuum ZPF can be breached by decreasing the noise in one
observable (or measurable quantity) at the expense of increasing the noise in the
conjugate observable; at the same time the variations in the first observable, say the
energy, are reduced below the ZPF such that the energy becomes “negative.”
“Squeezing” is thus the control of quantum fluctuations and corresponding
uncertainties, whereby one can squeeze/reduce the variance of one (physically
important) observable quantity provided the variance in the (physically unimportant)
conjugate variable is stretched/increased. The squeezed quantity possesses an
unusually low variance, meaning less variance than would be expected on the basis of
the equipartition thearem. One can in principle exploit quantum squeezing to extract
energy from one place in the ordinary vacuum at the expense of accumulating excess
energy elsewhere.

The squeezed state of the electromagnetic field is a primary example of a quantum field
that has negative energy density and negative energy flux. Such a state became a
physical reality in the laboratory as a result of the nonlinear-optics technique of
“squeezing”; that is, of moving some of the quantum-fluctuations of laser light out of
the cos[w(t — z/c)] part of the beam and into the sin[w(f — z/c)] part (Reference 95-

100).16 The observable that gets squeezed will have its fluctuations reduced below the
vacuum ZPF. The act of squeezing transforms the phase space circular noise profile
characteristic of the vacuum into an ellipse, whose semimajor and semiminor axes are
given by unequal quadrature uncertainties (of the quantized electromagnetic field
harmonic oscillator operators). This applies to coherent states in general, and the usual
vacuum is also a coherent state with eigenvalue zero. As this ellipse rotates about the
origin with angular frequency, w, these unequal quadrature uncertainties manifest
themselves in the electromagnetic field oscillator energy by periodic occurrences, which
are separated by one quarter cycle, of both smaller and larger fluctuations compared to
the unsqueezed vacuum.

Caves (Reference 101) points out that if one squeezes the vacuum—that is, if one puts
vacuum rather than laser light into the input port of a squeezing device—then one gets
at the output an electromagnetic field with weaker fluctuations and thus less energy
density than the vacuum at locations where cos?[m(t — z/c)] = 1 and sin@[m(t — z/c)] <<
1; but with greater fluctuations and thus greater energy density than the vacuum at
locations where cos*[w(t - z/c)] << 1 and sin?[w(t - z/c)] = 1. Since the vacuum is

18 ig the angular frequency of light, t is time, and z denotes the z-axis direction of beam propagation.

32
UNCLASSIFIED / / P@te@PPternr esr onrr

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / POR“OFPSGPAL-U6E- Oia

defined to have vanishing energy density, any region with less energy density than the
vacuum actually has a negative (renormalized) expectation value for the energy density
- hence, this is a degradable vacuum. Therefore, a squeezed vacuum state consists of a
traveling electromagnetic wave that oscillates back and forth between negative energy
density and positive energy density, but has positive time-averaged energy density.

For the squeezed electromagnetic vacuum state, the energy density prs. is given by
(Reference 102):

Presque (72 ) sim é[ sinh &+cosh Ecos(2@(t— z/c)+ 8) | (I/m*) (6)

where £? is the volume of a large box with sides of length Z (that is, put the quantum
field in a box with periodic boundary conditions), & is the squeezed state amplitude
(giving a measure of the mean photon number in a squeezed state), and 6 is the phase
of squeezing. Equation (6) shows that pr.qvue falls below zero once every cycle when the
condition coshé > sinhé is met. It turns out that this is always true for every nonzero
value of & SO prague becomes negative at some point in the cycle for a general squeezed
vacuum state. On another note, when a quantum state is close to a squeezed vacuum
state, there will almost always be some negative vacuum energy densities present.

Dirac Vacuum Decay: “Sparking the Vacuum”

Fulcher et al. (Reference 53), Rafelski and Miller (Reference 54), and Rafelski

(Reference 55) describe a phenomenon whereby the QED vacuum?’ behaves like a
nonlinear dielectric medium and undergoes breakdown (or decay) in the vicinity of
super-heavy (supercritical) atomic nuclei!® or in the presence of externally applied

electric or magnetic fields of critical (or supercritical) strength.!9 This decay results in
the spontaneous production of electron-positran pairs from the vacuum, This
phenomenon is known as the Heisenberg-Euler-Schwinger mechanism, which Rafelski
and collaborators euphemistically call “sparking the vacuum.” Ringwald (Reference 104}
prefers to call it “boiling the vacuum.” Supercritical atomic nuclei can be created by the
slow collision of two uranium (or heavier) nuclei while critical/supercritical electric or
magnetic fields can be produced by ultrahigh intensity chirped-pulse amplification lasers
(with power intensities on the order of 1019 to 1039 W/m?).

To be more precise, when an electric field is made sufficiently strong so that the
vacuum polarization (that is, virtual electron-positron pairs, aka ZPF) becomes real,
then, due to charge conservation, the balancing charge must be eliminated, and so
during the process of changing the vacuum from a neutral to a charged state, some
charge must be emitted. And if in the vicinity of the electric field of a super-heavy
nucleus or of an externally applied electric or magnetic field, the vacuum carries the
charge of an electron, the emitted particle must always be a positron. Studies have

'” For historical reasons, the QED vacuum Is also called the “Dirac sea” or “Dirac vacuum” (Reference 103).

18 Supercritical atamic nuclei have an electric charge (proton number) of Z > 173, which produces supercritical
electric fields.

39 The critical QED vacuum breakdown electric fleld strength Is F, = 207.2c3/ne = 10'* V/m, where é Is the electron
charge (1.602 x 10 '° C). This quantity is defined by the total rest-energy of an electron-positron pair created from
the vacuum divided by the electron's Compton wavelength. And the critical QED vacuum breakdown magnetic field
strength is B, = E./c = 10° Tesla. Supercritical fields have strengths greater than £, or By.

33
UNCLASSIFIED / AP@fe@PREGHr-USE-ONEY

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / PO?eOPFte?hh- vse

shown that this positron must have a very well defined energy. The applied electric field
determines how large this energy will be. If the electric/magnetic field is increased
above critical strength, then more electron-positron pairs will be produced from the
vacuum.

Clearly, the charged vacuum is a new ground state of space and matter. The normal,
undercritical, electrically neutral vacuum is no longer stable in supercritical fields: it
decays spontaneously into the new stable but charged vacuum. Thus the standard
definition of the vacuum, as a region of space devoid of real elementary particles, is no
longer valid in very strong external fields. The vacuum is better defined as the
energetically deepest and most stable state that a region of space can have while being
penetrated by certain fields.

Magnetically Induced Decay of the Dirac Vacuum

Xue (Reference 105, 106) developed a Dirac vacuum decay mechanism that is different
fram the Heisenberg-Euler-Schwinger mechanism and proposed that energy could be
continuously extracted from it. He modeled his decay mechanism after the (vacuum
electromagnetic) Casimir effect wherein the vacuum state is modified by boundary
conditions. From an energetic point of view, the Casimir effect can be physically
understood as the following: 1) the continuous energy spectrum of vacuum
electromagnetic fields is modified by boundary conditions to be discrete; 2) the vacuum
energy of the “final” vacuum state, computed from the discrete energy spectrum in a
given finite volume, is smaller than the vacuum energy of the “initial” vacuum state,
computed from the continuous energy spectrum in the same volume; 3) as a result, the
vacuum gains energy and becomes energetically unstable and has to decay from the
“initial” vacuum state to the “final” vacuum state by quantum field fluctuations. This
difference of vacuum energies between two vacuum states must be released, and this
leads to the attractive and macroscopic force observed in the Casimir effect. Xue
suggests that instead of modifying the energy spectrum of virtual photons by boundary
conditions as in the Casimir effect, one should attempt to vary the vacuum energy by
modifying the negative energy spectrum of virtual fermions (in the Dirac vacuum) by an
externally applied magnetic field (of strength 8). In this case, the externally applied
magnetic field acts as a boundary condition on the Dirac vacuum.

Xue defines the vacuum state with B = 0 as the “initial” vacuum state and the vacuum
state with B + 0 as the “final” vacuum state. The negative energy spectrum2° of the
initial vacuum state is modified to the negative energy spectrum?! of the final vacuum
State, due to the external magnetic field. If the vacuum energy of the final B # 0
vacuum state made by virtual fermions fully filling its negative energy spectrum is

20 The negative and nondegenerate energy spectrum of free virtual charged fermions in the Dirac vacuum is:

3 3 . y2
e,([p) = -(p! +p+p +m) , Where p is the magnitude of the fermion’s momentum, («, Py, Pz) are the

spatial momentum components, and m is the fermion‘s mass. This spectral energy density is integrated over all
possible momentum states of the quantum fleld fluctuations in order to give the total (negative) Dirac vacuum
energy.

21 The energy spectrum of virtual charged fermions in the presence of an externa! constant magnetic field (a.k.a.

2 3 ya
the Landau levels) is: ¢, (p,.n,h) = ~(p: trelel BQn4+ 1) —eBh} , where e is the fermion’s bare charge, h

= +1 is the fermion’s helicity, n = 0,1,2,3,..., and the magnetic field Bis along the z-axis. This negative energy
spectrum is degenerate in the phase space of (px, py). This spectral energy density is integrated over all possible
momentum states of the quantum field fluctuations in order to give the total (negative) Dirac vacuum energy.

34
UNCLASSIFIED / /®@®@FEIGEA-UGE ONE

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /*@R-@FE1-GR=WSE-OAliee

smaller than that of the initial B = 0 vacuum state made by virtual fermions fully filling
its negative energy spectrum, then the vacuum state gains energy and must decay
from the initial vacuum state to the final vacuum state by quantum field fluctuations.
The difference in vacuum energies between the two vacuum states must be released.

Xue makes all the usual vacuum expectation value renormalization calculations upon er
and «., and found that the energetic difference between the vacuum states 8 = 0 and B
# 0 is negative, indicating that the vacuum energy of the B # O state is smaller than the
vacuum energy of the B = 0 state; that is, the vacuum state gains energy when the
external magnetic field is applied to it. He shows that this effect occurs because in a
finite volume of space and with a finite momentum cutoff at the Planck scale Ap, the
total number of fermion states in the vacua of negative energy spectra cr and e. are
finite and all these fermion states of negative energy levels from —Ap to —mc? are fully
filled. The negative energy spectrum er is not degenerate, while the negative energy
spectrum e1 is degenerate, and the total numbers of fermion states in both cases are
the same. On the basis of quantum field fluctuations toward the lowest energy state
and the Pauli principle, when the external magnetic field is applied upon the vacuum,
the vacuum reorganizes itself by fully filling all fermion states according to the
degenerate negative energy spectrum e1, instead of the nondegenerate er, As a
consequence, the vacuum makes its total energy lower. The energy released by this

decay process is: AK = -8a8°V /3n, where V is the volume of space occupied by the
external magnetic field, and a is the electromagnetic fine structure constant.

In principle, this effect can occur for any value of the applied magnetic field, and in this
particular decay process a non-critical magnetic field is required. Xue predicts possibly
observable effects such as the vacuum acting like a paramagnetic medium that
effectively screens the strength of the external magnetic field to a smaller magnitude;
the associated ZPF could lead to the emission of neutrino-antineutrino pairs from the
vacuum; and photons will be spontaneously emitted. He estimated that the released
vacuum energy (AE) will be about 1 percent of the total energy stored in the external
magnetic field, so it is not yet clear whether this vacuum decay mechanism will lead to
any beneficial energy extraction,

Melting the QCD Vacuum

The idea of supercriticality as discussed in Section V also has applications in other field
theories, such as those of pion fields, gluon fields (quantum chromodynamics or QCD),
and gravitational fields (general relativity). Static fields that are strong enough to cause
the normal vacuum, which is devoid of real particles, to break down into a new vacuum
in which real particles exist is also predicted for these fields. A review a vacuum decay
concept that is different from supercriticality in QCD theory follows.

In their study of the structured vacuum, Rafelski and Muller (Reference 54) and Rafelski
(Reference 55) analyze the nature of the strongly interacting (QCD) vacuum and
elucidate its character from the Standard Madel of particle physics and high energy
particle accelerator data. They concluded that in addition to the electroweak vacuum
(that is, the unified electromagnetic and weak force vacua) there exists a dual QCD
vacuum structure: one vacuum structure that is everywhere in space and consists of a
complicated soup of interacting gluons which confine the quarks - this is called the
ordinary or “frozen” vacuum; and another vacuum structure that is found inside

35
UNCLASSIFIED / AP@R=@FEEGHr GEO

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / F@R-@FIGHi=6= Oh

elementary particles (for example, hadrons), and which behaves like the dielectric
vacuum of electrodynamics. In this second vacuum structure, particles that have a
strong charge (such as quarks or gluons) can move freely, but are confined by the
frozen vacuum that is everywhere else. This is called the perturbative, or gluon, or
“melted” vacuum, which can also be pictured as a quark-gluon plasma. They estimate
that there is a “latent heat” of ~ 1 GeV/fm3 (or 103° J/m3)22 associated with the phase
change of transforming from one vacuum structure to another when the gluonic
structures of the perturbative vacuum are melted. It is important to point out here that
this is a degradable vacuum structure.

This unusual dual vacuum structure led Rafelski and Muller to speculate on a
mechanism for the “burning of matter” as the ultimate source of energy in which it
might be passible that the energy contained within baryons could be converted into
useful energy. Their idea is to remove or destroy the three quarks residing inside a
baryon in order to gain energy, the latent heat, from the melted vacuum inside the
baryon. This process also entails the decay of the quarks via lepton-quark interactions,
which is a topic that is beyond the scope of this chapter. They suggest that it might be
possible that producing a quark-gluon plasma in high energy nuclear collisions could be
a very efficient source of energy. In this process atomic nuclei would be collided at high
energy in order to form a compressed high density zone in the region where the two
nuclei overlap. This would lead to the melting of the vacuum and the subsequent direct
conversion of matter into radiation, thus releasing ~ 1025 J/m? of energy density. This
magnitude of energy density would be very useful as a source of energy for space
propulsion applications.

Rafelski and Miller point out that the commonly held view that the centers of neutron
stars are dead and cold, due to their nuclear fuel having burnt out and the energy of
gravitational collapse having been expended for the conversion of the collapsed star
into a gigantic atomic nucleus, is not the complete story. They hold open the possibility
that the entire rest-mass of all the baryons inside neutron stars might become available
and converted into heat. In their scenario, the core of a neutron star is actually
composed of condensed quark matter, and the rest-mass of baryons is burnt up into
radiation inside the quark core. They also point out that supernovae explosions, gamma
ray bursts, positron emission from the center of our galaxy, quasars, and galactic nuclei
have been observed to emit extreme amounts of thermal energy, the mechanisms of
which are still not understood today.

Gogohia (Reference 107, 108) modeled Rafelski and Miiller’s idea by using an effective
potential approach for composite condensate? operators to formulate a general
method of calculating the non-perturbative (NPC) Yang-Mills vacuum energy density
(aka the QCD bag model constant, Bg)?* in the covariant gauge QCD vacuum-ground
state. His result that Bg = 1.84 GeV/fm? (or 2.95 x 10°75 ]/m?) found very good
agreement with its phenomenological value and with Rafelski and Miller’s naive
estimate. Gogohia also calculated the contribution of the gluon condensate energy
density to Bg: (asf?/n) = 1.82 GeV/fm3 (or 2.92 « 1035 J/m3), where as is the strong

7? 1 GeV = 10% eV: L fm = 1078 m,

23 In quantum field theary, the vacuum expectation value (of a quantum operator) is also called a “condensate,”
and this is denoted by placing angular brackets around the quantum operator,

4 See Appendix A for a detailed explanation of the QCD bag model.

36
UNCLASSIFIED / / h@Re@ERIGEALUSE-ODhiian

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / POR OPPSGERE SSP onrrT

coupling strength (aka quark-gluon coupling) and [ is the gluon field strength tensor
(tensor indices suppressed). The quark condensate energy density contribution to Bg is
down by two orders of magnitude from this estimate. Gogohia argues that the bag
constant determines the energy which can be released from the NPC vacuum, which he
considers to be a “perpetuum source of infinite energy.” He did not propose a detailed
physical mechanism that specifies how to release a finite portion of the bag constant
energy or whether one could introduce some type of cyclic process to extract energy.
This. requires further research in order to resolve this question.

Summary: ZPF Modes and Vacuum Field Energy

The previous examples illustrate how the vacuum becomes degradable or can decay
when perturbed under certain conditions. In each of the examples, the vacuum ZPF
modes were perturbed by boundary conditions, quantum optics effects, or
interacting/externally applied fields in such a way as to drive the QED field’s vacuum
state energy below zero, or the QED vacuum undergoes decay along with the
spontaneous production of particle-antiparticle pairs, or the vacuum undergoes a phase
change and releases energy as in the QCD case. The (electromagnetic) Casimir effect is
an example in which certain ZPF modes are excluded by physical boundary conditions
that perturb the free-space vacuum ZPF modes, thus driving the vacuum
electromagnetic field energy below zero inside a Casimir cavity.

In accordance with the discussion in Sections III and V, the ZPF modes serve only as a
placeholder for a quantum field’s vacuum state calculations. Therefore, the “hardwired”
ZPF modes cannot be driven below the ground state. It is only a quantum field’s overall
(renormalized) vacuum state energy that can be driven down to or below the ground
state. The QED vacuum (in both of its incarnations: virtual bosonic electromagnetic
vacuum and virtual fermionic Dirac vacuum) and the QCD vacua are degradable while
both can also undergo decay via numerous mechanisms. Energy release is predicted for
some of the decay mechanisms while it has already been observed via the Casimir
effect and the inflationary expansion of the universe.

Therefore, one can conjecture that the key to exploring the possibility of extracting
energy from the vacuum is to invent new boundary conditions or new combinations of
boundary conditions as well as new methods of modifying the quantum vacuum
boundary conditions that perturb the ZPF modes of any quantum field under study.
Quantum vacuum boundary conditions can take many different forms: they can be
physical boundaries like the conductor or dielectric plates used in Casimir cavities,
which can also involve complex cavity geometries; they can be topological—that is,
complex spacetime geometries with special coordinate constraints; or they can be in
the form of interacting or externally applied fields such as gravitational,
electromagnetic, electroweak, scalar, QCD, massive fields or dense, moving nuclear
matter on the quantum vacuum, and so forth. This is a topic that is in need of
dedicated theoretical and experimental research (Reference 62, 91, 103).

VI. Conclusion: The Way Forward

What are the conclusions that can be drawn from the considerations presented in this
report regarding the concept of continuous conversion of energy from the quantum
electromagnetic vacuum, the Dirac vacuum, or even the OCD vacua?

37
UNCLASSIFIED / /F@R=@FFEGHH=USE ON

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / P@Re-OPFtGEH-USE-Oh—

First, one sees that although the original inspiration for the concept of continuous
vacuum energy extraction came from second-quantized QED theory, it must be
acknowledged that QED, as an axiomatic, quantized formalism based on the concept of
an immutable, non-degradable vacuum, does not support the concept of continuous
vacuum energy conversion. Given that second-quantized QED is our most
comprehensive quantum theory to date, its lack of support for continuous vacuum
energy conversion must be given serious consideration.

Second, SED as an alternative theory, whose formalism has been taken to support the
concept of continuous vacuum energy conversion, has enough shortcomings in its
current state of development that one must conclude that it is not at present an
adequate tool for the assessment of potential vacuum energy conversion. SED
predictions must thus remain suspect in the absence of experimental confirmation. The
purpose of the experimental program outlined in Section IV is meant to address this
need,

Third, the concept of the conversion of energy from vacuum fluctuations is in principle
not falsifiable, given the unknowns which present theory has yet to resolve (for
example, cosmological dark energy, multiple vacuum structures), and the numerous
approaches currently being brought to bear in the development of quantum theory.

Finally, even though experimental efforts at energy extraction from the vacuum have
been proposed or are already under way at various laboratories, definitive theoretical
support underpinning the concept of useful extraction of energy from quantum
fluctuations is not yet in place. Such support awaits theoretical developments that
either posits a plenum that (unlike second-quantized QED) can be shown to be
degradable, or posit conversion of energy associated with matter fluctuations, also ina
degradable fashion. Since the quantum fluctuations of interest are associated with
quantum ground states, what is minimally required are particle-vacuum or particle-
particle interactions that result in the formation of alternate lower-energy, ground
states of matter/field configurations. Suggested approaches to be explored are those
which are known to yield results consistent with the existence of vacuum fluctuation
fields, but without the formalism of independently postulated second-quantized vacuum
fields. Whether useful canversion of energy from quantum fluctuations can be
accomplished, and identifying the unequivocal conditions under which this can be
achieved, are yet to be determined.

It has been shown that the QED vacuum is in fact degradable under the action of a
variety of Casimir effects, quantum optical vacuum squeezing, gravitation-induced
vacuum squeezing, or gravitational redshifting. There is also QED vacuum decay via the
critical/supercritical electric fields of superheavy atomic nuclei, X-ray free-electron
lasers, or externally applied (non-critical) magnetic fields. However, it is not known
whether these effects can be exploited for the continuous extraction of useful energy
from the vacuum. The concept of a dual, degradable vacuum structure in QCD can
possibly lead to the generation of useful energy via the release of latent heat from
melting the QCD vacuum.

A game changer may appear that could dramatically accelerate or alter the direction of
theoretical and experimental programs. Such a game changer could entail a complete,

comprehensive unified field theory (that is, a finalized quantum superstring theory, or

some other theory that replaces it), or a completely new theory for the quantum

38
UNCLASSIFIED / /®@R-@EEtGbA1HUGE-BaleY

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / h@-OFFEGEESEONT

vacuum and its related spacetime physics (for example, “emergent” spacetime/gravity
theories (Reference 109-111)}. New materials or combinations of materials, such as
condensed matter (superconductors), semiconductors or metamaterials, would also be
an important game changer because of the unique ways that quantum fields would
interact with them to produce phenomena of interest.

In going forward to the potential demonstration of continuous energy extraction from
the vacuum, one should consider the following additional action items for further R&D:

39

The quantum vacuum electromagnetic effects outlined in Section IV were computed
to scale with Planck’s constant and are therefore very small. In order to have a
practical device based on quantum vacuum properties, it would be preferable that
the vacuum effects the scale, meaning that the effects are essentially independent
of Plank’s constant and consequently may be much larger. By itself this requirement
does not guarantee a large enough magnitude, but it certainly helps.
Electromagnetic Casimir effects are typically small and difficult to measure. In fact,
measurements have only been made for simple geometries such as the parallel
plate or the sphere-plate geometries. This fact raises a question: Is it possible to
amplify these effects and bring them into a useful range? This is certainly one of the
challenges of vacuum engineering. The experiment described in Section IV could
address this question.

Experiments are needed to explore some of the issues that are beyond the present
computational ability of QED; for example, the effect of complex geometries on
vacuum forces, or the effect of interacting or externally applied fields or dense,
moving nuclear matter on the quantum vacuum. Is it passible to make a stable
vacuum field that has a large variation in energy density? Can energy density
gradients be found on a length scale that is useful for technological applications?
One needs to greatly increase our knowledge of the quantum vacuum. The
development of a very sensitive small probe that provides a frequency
decomposition of the local vacuum energy density would very useful.

- A first step in this direction was recently proposed by Marecki (Reference 112)
who generalized the analysis of the output of balanced homodyne detectors
(BHDs). The most important feature of these devices is their ability to quantify
the quantum vacuum fluctuations of the electric field because the output of BHDs
provides information on the one- and two-point functions of arbitrary states of
quantum fields. Marecki computed the two-point function and the associated
spectral density for the ground state of the quantum electric field in Casimir
geometries, and predicts a position- and frequency-dependent pattern of BHD
responses if a device of this type is placed inside a Casimir cavity. The proposed
device allows for the direct detection of quantum vacuum fluctuations and
provides a spatial mapping of the vacuum energy contained inside the cavity.
This offers a potential new characterization of ground states in Casimir
geometries, which would provide an understanding of the vacuum energy
densities present in some regions in these geometries.

From the status of current research in Casimir forces, it is clear that one is at the
cusp of describing the properties of the quantum vacuum for real systems with real
material properties. For example, there is no general agreement regarding the
calculations of static vacuum forces for geometries other than infinite parallel plates

UNCLASSIFIED / /8@2.O.564GRi=U6r OnE

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / B@R-@55162041-U65-001Y

of ideal or real metals at a temperature of absolute zero. Non-zero temperature
corrections for flat, real metals are uncertain. There are fundamental disagreements
about the computation of vacuum forces for spheres or rectangular cavities, and
about how to handle real material properties and curvature in these and other
geometries. Indeed, it is very difficult to calculate Casimir forces for these simple
geometries and to relate the calculations to an experiment. Calculations have yet to
be done for more complex geometries. The usual problems in QED (for example,
divergences due to unrealistic boundary conditions, to curvature, to interfaces with
different dielectric coefficients) abound. These problems require theoretical and
experimental resolution.

As stated in Section V, there is need to find new boundary conditions for the
vacuum that can alter the vacuum energy density by orders of magnitude more than
with the current boundary conditions, which are primarily metallic or dielectric
surfaces. Perhaps the use of new materials (for example, those with a negative
index of refraction, or an ultra-high electrical carrier density, either steady state or
transient), or novel condensed matter (superconducting) materials may open the
door to new Casimir phenomena. Recently the use of (negative index)
metamaterials was proposed to make a repulsive Casimir force (Reference 113).
With significantly increased funding for research, some breakthroughs in this area
might be possible.

There are several important experiments that can aid our understanding of vacuum
energy and Casimir forces that may lead to significant improvements in our
engineering capability:

— Experiments measuring the Casimir forces for semiconductor surfaces would be
helpful in the development of new applications of vacuum forces and to
demonstrate that it is possible to alter the Casimir force by altering the carrier
density.

— The measurement of Casimir forces and energies for different geometry and
composition objects, such as rectangular cavities or spheres, would provide data
for theoretical modeling. Measurements of Casimir forces between separate,
nonplanar surfaces are also needed. There may be surfaces that have larger
forces than the classic parallel plates.

— New boundary conditions or new methods of modifying the known quantum
vacuum boundary conditions may be needed to generate the large changes in
free-field vacuum energy required if “vacuum engineering” as proposed in this
report is ever to become practical. For example, the vacuum energy density
difference between parallel plates and the region outside them in free space is
simply not large enough in magnitude for large-scale engineering purposes.
Energy densities, positive or negative, that are orders of magnitude greater are
required. Such energy density regions may be possible, at least in some cases.
For example, a region appeared in the one-dimensional dynamic system in which
the energy density was below that of the Casimir parallel plate region (Reference
114).

~ Experiments to verify the adiabatic Casimir effect have been suggested in the
literature. This is an important theoretical issue that has ramifications in different

UNCLASSIFIED / /P@R@FF5Gh-UGEONT

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /AR.OEEEGLALASE-Oiiee

fields, including astrophysics and elementary particle physics. Clever
experimental approaches should be developed to explore the adiabatic Casimir
effect.

» There are numerous potential ways in which the ground state of the vacuum
electromagnetic field might be engineered for use in MEMS and NEMS applications.

* Dirac vacuum decay via external (non-critical) magnetic fields requires further
evaluation, and it should become possible to experimentally test this in the
laboratory within two to five years.

e Theoretical and laboratory studies of the dual QCD vacuum have been underway for
over 20 years. The progress in experimental particle physics is such that one gains
an order of magnitude in the resolution (that is, energy) of elementary particle
structures roughly every decade. It is hoped that the commissioning of the Large
Hadron Collider will lead to higher resolution probing of the dual OCD vacuum
structure, and help to determine whether there are deeper grand unified and/or
Higgs vacuum structures residing within quarks. Future accelerator experiments
should be designed to explore Rafelski and Muller’s and Gogohia’s proposal to
extract energy from the “melted” QCD vacuum.

Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank colleagues H. E. Puthoff (EarthTech, Int'l), V. Teofilo
(Lockheed Martin), B. Haisch (ManyOne Networks), L. J. Nickisch (Northwest Research
Assoc.), A. Rueda (California State University-Long Beach), D. C. Cole (Boston
University), M. Ibison (Inst. for Advanced Studies at Austin), S. Little (EarthTech Int'l),
and M. Little (EarthTech Int’l), for their technical contributions to this report. We also
thank J. Newmeyer (Lockheed Martin), E. H. Allen (Lockheed Martin), T. W. Kephart
(Vanderbilt Univ.), and P. C. W. Davies (Arizona State Univ.) for their very useful input.

Al
UNCLASSIFIED / /#@R-O563GRiiewGtR Ohm

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / -@R-65F26E21-U6E-O8

Appendix: The QCD Bag Model

When considering the effective masses of quarks bound within hadrons, it is common to
think of the constituent masses of the quark and antiquark pair as their zero-point
energy (ZPE) when they are bound by the confining potential? (acting between a quark
and an antiquark) with an energy spectrum that corresponds to the masses of the
observed mesons. For charm, and heavier quarks, it appears that the total ZPE is not
much different from the masses of the lowest-lying meson states. This picture also
holds true for baryons. The quark-gluon model for hadrons is called “the bag model.”

Even in an “empty” bag—that is, one containing no quarks—there will be nonzero fields
present because of quantum zero-point fluctuations (ZPF). This gives rise to a zero-
point (ZP) or Casimir energy inside the empty bag. The estimated total ZP/Casimir
energy of the confined gluon field inside a spherical bag is Fze x +0.7/a (or +0.7A¢/a in
MKS units), where a is the radius of the bag in GeV-? units. Eze is numerically the entire
story because the ZPE contribution of the confined fermion (quark) field is far smaller
than Eze (the leading approximation per degree of freedom is down by two orders of
magnitude). A typical empty bag has an estimated radius a = 2.6 GeV-! (0.5 fm), so Ezp
~ 10°! GeV (or 10-11 J), and this result remains approximately true if one uses a = 5.07
GeV"! (1 fm) for a nucleon-sized bag. If the bag contains quarks, then this result does
not change because the quarks don’t affect the ongoing quantum ZPF inside the bag
due to asymptotic freedom.

The inventor of the empty bag model (Ken Johnson) proposed that space is filled with
closely packed empty bags, and that the energy of space filled with contiguous bags is
simply the sum of the field energies contained within each bag. But this is not widely
accepted since the phenomenologically preferred model for the exterior “ordinary”
vacuum is given as follows.

OCD color confinement in hadrons is approximated by the phenomenologically
successful “bag model.” In this model, the “ordinary” vacuum external to hadrons is a
perfect color magnetic (or chromomagnetic) conductor; that is, the chromomagnetic
permeability p is infinite, while the chromomagnetic vacuum in the interior of the bag is
characterized by p = 1. This implies that the color electric (Egcp) and magnetic (Bacp)
fields are confined to the interior of the bag, and that they satisfy the following
boundary conditions on its surface S: m- Eqcols = 0, m x Boco|s = 0, where nis a unit
normal vector to S. In other words, this model defines QCD vacua that coexist in two
phases: 1) an ordinary vacuum exterior to the bag, impenetrable to color; and 2) a
vacuum interior of the bag, in which the Yang-Mills fields that carry color (gluons)
propagate freely. Both phases are separated by the surface boundary of the bag upon
which the Yang-Mills and fermion (quark) field satisfy the aforementioned boundary

23 Quarks carry “color charge” as well as electric charge. Color charge is considered to be the “true” charge of
strong interactions. Gluons are the “photons” of strong interactions, and color is exchanged by eight bicolored
gluons, which are massless and have spin 1. Color interactions are assumed to be a copy of electromagnetic
interactions. Theoretical and phenomenological studies found that the confining patential V(r) lies between a

Coulomb and a harmonic oscillator potential: V(r) =—(4a, /3r) +r, where r is the radia! distance between
confined quarks, k is a constant parameter, and ; is the color factor associated with os for the case of quark-

antiquark pair confinement in mesons. For the case of baryons (qqq), the color factor in V(r) is replaced by : .

42
UNCLASSIFIED / / P@-@PEtGhhi-US>-@he==

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / 5@R-@5FtGE-Y6E-ONEY

conditions. It is always assumed that perturbation theory is valid inside the bag, while
the remainder of space is occupied by a “non-perturbational” chromomagnetic vacuum.

43
UNCLASSIFIED / /#@R=@PPRCEEUSEONET”

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / P@R@PFtGHL-V6S-Ohliaee

References

[1] DeWitt, B. S., “Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime,” Physics Reports, Vol.
19C, 1975, pp. 295-357.

[2] DeWitt, B. S., “Quantum gravity: the new synthesis,” General Relativity: An Einstein
Centenary Survey, edited by S. W. Hawking and W. Israel, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 1979, pp. 680-745.

[3] DeWitt, B. S., “The Casimir Effect in Field Theory,” Physics in the Making, Essays on
Developments in 20th Century Physics, In Honour of H. B. G. Casimir, edited by A.
Sarlemijn and J. Sparnaay, North-Holland Elsevier Science Publ., New York, 1989, pp.
247-272.

[4] Birrell, N. D., and Davies, P. C. W., Quantum fields in curved space, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1984.

[5] Casimir, H. B. G., “On the Attraction Between Two Perfectly Conducting Plates,”
Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wetensch., Vol. 51, 1948, pp. 793-796.

[6] Lamoreaux, S. K., “Demonstration of the Casimir Force in the 0.6 to 6 µm Range,”
Physical Review Letters, Vol. 78, 1997, pp. 5-8.

[7] Mohideen, U., “Precision Measurement of the Casimir Force from 0.1 to 0.9 µm,”
Physical Review Letters, Vol. 81, 1998, pp. 4549-4552.

[8] Chen, F., et al., “Theory confronts experiment in the Casimir force measurements:
Quantification of errors and precision,” Physical Review A, Vol. 69, 2004, 022117.

[9] Forward, R. L., “Alternate Propulsion Energy Sources,” Air Force Rocket Propulsion
Laboratory, Air Force Space Tech. Ctr. Space Div., Air Force Systems Command, Final
Report AFRPL TR-83-067, Edwards AFB, CA, 1983, pp. A1-A14.

[10] Forward, R. L., “Extracting Electrical Energy from the Vacuum by Cohesion of
Charged Foliated Conductors,” Physical Review B, Vol. 30, 1984, pp. 1700-1702.

[11] Cole, D. C., and Puthoff, H. E., “Extracting energy and heat from the vacuum,”
Physical Review E, Vol. 48, 1993, pp. 1562-1565.

[12] Mead, Jr., F. B., and Nachamkin, J., United States Patent No. 5,590,031 for
“System for Converting Electromagnetic Radiation Energy to Electrical Energy,” 1996.

[13] Peres, A., Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods, Kluwer, Dordrecht, Holland,
1993.

[14] Milonni, P. W., The Quantum Vacuum: An Introduction to Quantum
Electrodynamics, Academic Press, New York, 1994, Chaps. 1, 2, 8.

[15] Mulliken, R. S., “The Band Spectrum of Boron Monoxide,” Nature, Vol. 114, 1924,
p. 349.

[16] Ibison, M., and Haisch, B., “Quantum and classical statistics of the electromagnetic
zero-point field,” Physical Review A, Vol. 54, 1996, pp. 2737-2744.

44
UNCLASSIFIED / /S@Ra@EPEGHH= SEO

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / F@R-OFFtGH-UGE-ONE——

[17] de la Peña, L., and Cetto, A. M., The Quantum Dice: An Introduction to Stochastic
Electrodynamics, Kluwer, Dordrecht, Holland, 1996.

[18] Koch, R. H., Van Harlingen, D. J., and Clarke, J., “Quantum-Noise Theory for the
Resistively Shunted Josephson Junction,” Physical Review Letters, Vol. 45, 1980, pp.
2132-2135.

[19] Koch, R. H., Van Harlingen, D. J., and Clarke, J., “Observation of Zero-Point
Fluctuations in a Resistively Shunted Josephson Tunnel Junction,” Physical Review
Letters, Vol. 47, 1981, pp. 1216-1219.

[20] Koch, R. H., Van Harlingen, D. J., and Clarke, J., “Measurements of quantum noise
in resistively shunted Josephson junctions,” Physical Review B, Vol. 26, 1982, pp. 74-
87.

[21] Blanco, R., França, H. M., Santos, E., and Sponchiado, R. C., “Radiative noise in
circuits with inductance,” Physics Letters A, Vol. 282, 2001, pp. 349-356.

[22] Boyer, T. H., “Random electrodynamics: The theory of classical electrodynamics
with classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Physical Review D, Vol. 11, 1975,
pp. 790-808.

[23] Puthoff, H. E., “Ground state of hydrogen as a zero-point-fluctuation-determined
state,” Physical Review D, Vol. 35, 1987, pp. 3266-3269.

[24] Cole, D. C., and Zou, Y., “Quantum Mechanical Ground State of Hydrogen
Obtained from Classical Electrodynamics,” Physics Letters A, Vol. 317, 2003, pp. 14-20.

[25] Cole, D. C., and Zou, Y., “Analysis of Orbital Decay Time for the Classical
Hydrogen Atom Interacting with Circularly Polarized Electromagnetic Radiation,”
Physical Review E, Vol. 69, 2004, 016601.

[26] Maclay, G. J., “Analysis of zero-point electromagnetic energy and Casimir forces in
conducting rectangular cavities,” Physical Review A, Vol. 61, 2000, 052110.

[27] Haisch, B., and Moddel, G., “Quantum Vacuum Energy Extraction,” United States
Patent No. 7,379,286 B2, May 2008.

[28] Puthoff, H. E., Little, S. R., and Ibison, M., “Discussion of experiment involving
lowering of ground state energy for oscillation in a Casimir cavity,” Int’l Conf. on
Squeezed States and Uncertainty Relations (ICSSUR 2001); Special Session on Topics

of Physics Related to Stochastic Electrodynamics, Boston University, 2001.

[29] Puthoff, H. E., “Vacuum energy extraction by conductivity switching of Casimir
force,” Technical Memo, Inst. for Advanced Studies at Austin, Austin, TX, 1985
(unpublished).

[30] Lipkin, R., “Thin-film mirror changes into a window,” Science News, Vol. 149,
1996, p. 182.

[31] Pinto, F., “Engine cycle of an optically controlled vacuum energy transducer,”
Physical Review B, Vol. 60, 1999, pp. 14740-14755.

45
UNCLASSIFIED / /5@2-@5F56RR= HSE ONtT”

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / ®@R-@FE2GR HSE Odie

[32] Lin, S. Y., Moreno, J., and Fleming, J. G., “Three-dimensional photonic-crystal
emitter for thermal photovoltaic power generation,” Applied Physics Letters, Vol. 83,
2003, pp. 380-382.

[33] Iannuzzi, D., Lisanti, M., Munday, J. N., and Capasso, F., “The design of long
range quantum electrodynamical forces and torques between macroscopic bodies,”
Solid State Communications, Vol. 135, 2005, pp. 618-626.

[34] Forward, R. L., “Apparent Endless Extraction of Energy from the Vacuum by Cyclic
Manipulation of Casimir Cavity Dimensions,” NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Physics
Workshop Proceedings, NASA/CP-1999-208694, NASA Lewis Research Center,
Cleveland, 1999, pp. 51-54.

[35] Maclay, G. J., “Unusual Properties of Conductive Rectangular Cavities in the Zero
Point Electromagnetic Field: Resolving Forward’s Casimir Energy Extraction Cycle
Paradox,” Proceedings of the STAIF-1999: Conference on Applications of Thermophysics
in Microgravity and Breakthrough Propulsion Physics, edited by M. S. El-Genk, AIP Conf.
Proc. Vol. 458, AIP Press, New York, 1999, pp. 968-973.

[36] Shoulders, K. R., EV: A Tale of Discovery, Jupiter Technologies, Austin, TX, 1987.

[37] Stenhoff, M., Ball Lightning: An Unsolved Problem in Atmospheric Physics, Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publ., New York, 1999.

[38] Bostick, W. H., “Experimental Study of Ionized Matter Projected Across Magnetic
Field,” Physical Review, Vol. 104, 1956, p. 292.

[39] Bostick, W. H., “Experimental Study of Plasmoids,” Physical Review, Vol. 106,
1957, p. 404.

[40] Bostick, W. H., Prior, W., and Farber, E., “Plasma Vortices in the Coaxial Plasma
Accelerator,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 8, 1965, p. 745.

[41] Wells, D. R., “Observation of Plasma Vortex Rings,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 5, 1962,
p. 1016.

[42] Wells, D. R., “Axially Symmetric Force-Free Plasmoids,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 7,
1964, p. 826.

[43] Wells, D. R., “Injection and Trapping of Plasma Vortex Rings,” Physics of Fluids,
Vol. 9, 1966, p. 1010.

[44] Wells, D. R., and Schmidt, G., “Observation of Plasma Rotation Produced by an
Electrodeless Plasma Gun,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 6, 1963, p. 418.

[45] Nardi, V., Bostick, W. H., Feugeas, J., and Prior, W., “Internal structure of
electron-beam filaments,” Physical Review A, Vol. 22, 1980, pp. 2211-2217.

[46] Piestrup, M. A., Puthoff, H. E., and Ebert, P. J., “Measurement of Multiple-Electron
Emission in Single Field-Emission Events,” Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 82, 1997, pp.
5862-5864.

46
UNCLASSIFIED / /POR OPPS Es eh,

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / POR OPftreraresr ont

[47] Shoulders, K. R., United States Patent No. 5,054,046 for “Method and apparatus
for production and manipulation of high density charge,” 1991.

[48] Casimir, H. B. G., “Introductory remarks on quantum electrodynamics,” Physica,
Vol. 19, 1953, pp. 846-849.

[49] Puthoff, H. E., and Piestrup, M. A., “On the Possibility of Charge Confinement by
van der Waals/Casimir-type Forces,” Cornell University Library E-Print Physics Abstracts
Archive arXiv.org Database (online database), URL:
http://arxiv.org/physics/papers/0408/0408114.pdf (cited Aug. 2004, revised 2005).

[50] Puthoff, H. E., “Casimir Vacuum Energy and the Semiclassical Electron,”
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, Vol. 46, 2007, pp. 3005-3008.

[51] Volovik, G. E., The Universe in a Droplet of Helium, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
2003.

[52] Zavattini, E., et al., “Experimental Observation of Optical Rotation Generated in
Vacuum by a Magnetic Field,” Physical Review Letters, Vol. 96, 2006, 110406.

[53] Fulcher, L. P., Rafelski, J., and Klein, A., “The decay of the vacuum,” Scientific
American, Vol. 241, 1979, pp. 150-159.

[54] Rafelski, J., and Miller, B., The Structured Vacuum: Thinking About Nothing,
Verlag Harri Deutsch Publ., Frankfurt, Germany, 1985.

[55] Rafelski, J., “Vacuum Structure — An Essay,” Vacuum Structure in Intense Fields,
edited by H. M. Fried and B. Miller, NATO ASI Series, Series B: Physics Vol. 255,
Plenum Press, New York, 1991, pp. 1-28.

[56] Jaynes, E. T., “Survey of the Present Status of Neoclassical Radiation Theory,”
Coherence and Quantum Optics, edited by L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Plenum Press, New
York, 1973, pp. 35-81.

[57] Dirac, P. A. M., in Directions in Physics, edited by H. Hora and J. R. Shepanski,
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1978.

[58] Schwarzschild, B., “High-redshift supernovae indicate that dark energy has been
around for 10 billion years,” Physics Today, Vol. 66, 2007, pp. 21-25.

[59] Particle Data Group, “Review of Particle Physics,” Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and
Particle Physics, Vol. 33, 2006, pp. 210-232.

[60] Weinberg, S., “The Cosmological Constant Problem,” Reviews of Modern Physics,
Vol. 61, 1989, pp. 1-23. (See also, “The Cosmological Constant Problems,” Cornell
University Library E-Print Physics Abstracts Archive arXiv.org Database (online
database), URL: http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/astro-ph/pdf/0005/0005265. pdf (cited 12
May 2000).

[61] Volovik, G. E., “Vacuum Energy: Myths and Reality,” International Journal of
Modern Physics D, Vol. 15, 2006, pp. 1987-2010.

47
UNCLASSIFIED / /2@Rn@RiGiid Geo hHeien

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /F@R-@EF26EH-VU6E-OhE-

[62] Milton, K. A., The Casimir Effect: Physical Manifestations of Zero-Point Energy,
World Scientific, Singapore, 2001, p. 13.

[63] Chan, H. B., et al., “Quantum Mechanical Actuation of Microelectromechanical
Systems by the Casimir force,” Science, Vol. 291, 2001, pp. 1941-1944.

[64] Sakharov, A. D., “Vacuum Quantum Fluctuations in Curved Space and the Theory
of Gravitation,” Soviet Physics Doklady, Vol. 12, 1968, pp. 1040-1041.

[65] Peacock, J. A., Cosmological Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1999,
pp. 25-26.

[66] Jaynes, E. T., “Probability in Quantum Theory,” Complexity, Entropy, and the
Physics of Information, edited by W. Zurek, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1990, pp. 381-
403.

[67] Jaynes, E. T., “Electrodynamics Today,” Coherence and Quantum Optics, edited by
L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Plenum Press, New York, 1978, pp. 495-509.

[68] Boyer, T. H., “Equilibrium of Random Classical Electromagnetic Radiation in the
Presence of a Nonrelativistic Nonlinear Electric Dipole Oscillator,” Physical Review D,
Vol. 13, 1976, pp. 2832-2845.

[69] Pesquera, L., and Claverie, P., “The Quartic Anharmonic Oscillator in Stochastic
Electrodynamics,” Journal of Mathematical Physics, Vol. 23, 1982, pp. 1315-1322.

[70] Blanco, R., Pesquera, L., and Santos, E., “Equilibrium Between Radiation and
Matter for Classical Relativistic Multiperiodic Systems. Derivation of Maxwell-Boltzmann
Distribution from Rayleigh-Jeans Spectrum,” Physical Review D, Vol. 27, 1983, pp.
1254-1287.

[71] Blanco, R., Pesquera, L., and Santos, E., “Equilibrium Between Radiation and
Matter for Classical Relativistic Multiperiodic Systems. II. Study of Radiative Equilibrium
with Rayleigh-Jeans Radiation,” Physical Review D, Vol. 29, 1984, pp. 2240-2254.

[72] Cole, D. C., “Simulation Results Related to Stochastic Electrodynamics,”
Proceedings of the Int’l Conference on Quantum Theory: Reconsideration of
Foundations-3, edited by G. Adenier, A. Khrennikov, and T. M. Nieuwenhuizen, AIP
Conference Proceedings Vol. 810, No. 1, New York, 2005, pp. 99-113.

[73] Cole, D. C., and Rueda, A., “The Quantum Dice: An Introduction to Stochastic
Electrodynamics,” Foundations of Physics, Vol. 26, 1996, pp. 1559-1562.

[74] de la Pena, L., and Cetto, A. M., “Contribution from stochastic electrodynamics to
the understanding of quantum mechanics,” Cornell University Library E-Print Physics
Abstracts Archive arXiv.org Database (online database), URL:
http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/quant-ph/pdf/0501/0501011.pdf (cited 4 Jan. 2005).

[75] Barut, A. O., “Quantum electrodynamics based on self-energy versus quantization
of fields: Illustration by a simple model,” Physical Review A, Vol. 34, 1986, pp. 3502-
3503.

48
UNCLASSIFIED / /2O2-@6555GEirUSE ONE

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / /-O.Ra@ EEG

[76] Barut, A. O., and van Huele, J. F., “Quantum electrodynamics based on self-
energy: Lamb shift and spontaneous emission without field quantization,” Physical
Review A, Vol. 32, 1985, pp. 3187-3195.

[77] Barut, A. O., et al., “Relativistic theory of the Lamb shift in self-field quantum
electrodynamics,” Physical Review A, Vol. 45, 1992, pp. 7740-7745.

[78] Barut, A. O., and Dowling, J. P., “Quantum electrodynamics based on self-energy:
Spontaneous emission in cavities,” Physical Review A, Vol. 36, 1987, pp. 649-654.

[79] Barut, A. O., and Dowling, J. P., “Quantum electrodynamics based on self-energy,
without second quantization: The Lamb shift and long-range Casimir-Polder van der
Waals forces near boundaries,” Physical Review A, Vol. 36, 1987, pp. 2550-2556.

[80] Barut, A. O., Dowling, J. P., and van Huele, J. F., “Quantum electrodynamics based
on self-fields, without second quantization: A nonrelativistic calculation of g-2,” Physical
Review A, Vol. 38, 1988, pp. 4405-4412.

[81] Barut, A. O., and Dowling, J. P., “Quantum electrodynamics based on self-fields,
without second quantization: Apparatus dependent contributions to g-2,” Physical
Review A, Vol. 39, 1989, pp. 2796-2805.

[82] Barut, A. O., and Dowling, J. P., “QED based on self-fields: A relativistic calculation
of g-2," Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, Vol. A44, 1989, p. 1051.

[83] Barut, A. O., and Dowling, J. P., “Quantum electrodynamics based on self-fields:
On the origin of thermal radiation detected by an accelerated observer,” Physical
Review A, Vol. 41, 1990, pp. 2277-2283.

[84] Hochberg, D., and Kephart, T. W., “Lorentzian wormholes from the gravitationally
squeezed vacuum,” Physics Letters B, Vol. 268, 1991, pp. 377-383.) Calloni, E., et al.,
“Gravitational effects on a rigid Casimir cavity,” International Journal of Modern Physics
A, Vol. 17, 2002, pp. 804-807.

[86] Calloni, E., et al., “Vacuum fluctuation force on a rigid Casimir cavity in a
gravitational field,” Physics Letters A, Vol. 297, 2002, pp. 328-333.

[87] Bimonte, G., et al., “Energy-momentum tensor for a Casimir apparatus in a weak
gravitational field,” Physical Review D, Vol. 74, 2006, 085011.

[88] Bimonte, G., et al., “Erratum: Energy-momentum tensor for a Casimir apparatus
in a weak gravitational field,” Physical Review D, Vol. 75, 2007, 089901(E).

[89] Bimonte, G., et al., “Novel features of the energy-momentum tensor of a Casimir
apparatus in a weak gravitational field,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical, Vol. 41, 2008, 164056.

[90] Brown, L. S., and Maclay, G. J., “Vacuum Stress between Conducting Plates: An
Image Solution,” Physical Review, Vol. 184, 1969, pp. 1272-1279.

[91] Mostepanenko, V. M. and Trunov, N. N., The Casimir Effect and its Applications,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007,

49
UNCLASSIFIED / /SQ@RnOEELGIAdl SER

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / POROTTrern esr ornrr™

[92] Walker, W. R., “Negative energy fluxes and moving mirrors in curved space,”
Classical and Quantum Gravity, Vol. 2, 1985, pp. L37-L40.

[93] Moore, G. T., “Quantum Theory of the Electromagnetic Field in a Variable-Length
One-Dimensional Cavity,” Journal of Mathematical Physics, Vol. 11, 1970, pp. 2679-
2691.

[94] Epstein, H., Glaser, V., and Jaffe, A., “Nonpositivity of the Energy Density in
Quantized Field Theories,” Nuovo Cimento, Vol. 36, 1965, pp. 1016-1022.

[95] Drummond, P. D., and Ficek, Z. (eds.), Quantum Squeezing, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 2004.

[96] Slusher, R. E., et al., “Observation of Squeezed States Generated by Four-Wave
Mixing in an Optical Cavity,” Physical Review Letters, Vol. 55, 1985, pp. 2409-2412.

[97] Slusher, R. E., and Yurke, B., “Squeezed Light,” Scientific American, Vol. 254,
1986, pp. 50-56.

[98] Robinson, A. L., “Bell Labs Generates Squeezed Light,” Science, Vol. 230, 1985,
pp. 927-929.

[99] Robinson, A. L., “Now Four Laboratories Have Squeezed Light,” Science, Vol. 233,
986, pp. 280-281.

[100] Saleh, B. E. A., and Teich, M. C., Fundamentals of Photonics, Wiley Series in Pure
and Applied Optics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1991, pp. 414-416.

[101] Caves, C. M., “Quantum-mechanical noise in an interferometer,” Physical Review
D, Vol. 23, 1981, pp. 1693-1708.

[102] Pfenning, M. J., “Quantum Inequality Restrictions on Negative Energy Densities in
Curved Spacetimes,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Tufts Univ.,
Medford, MA, 1998.

[103] Saunders, S., and Brown, H. R. (eds.), The Philosophy of Vacuum, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1991.

[104] Ringwald, A., “Boiling the Vacuum with an X-Ray Free Electron Laser,” Cornell
Univ. Library arXiv.org e-Print Archive, URL: http://arxiv.org/hep-ph/0304139. pdf
[cited 15 April 2003).

[105] Xue, S.-S., “Possible vacuum-energy releasing,” Physics Letters B, Vol. 508,
2001, pp. 211-215.

[106] Xue, S.-S., “Magnetically induced vacuum decay,” Physical Review D, Vol. 68,
2003, 013004.

[107] Gogohia, V., et al. (1999), “Vacuum energy density of chiral QCD in the zero
modes enhancement quantum model,” Phys. Lett. B, vol. 453, pp. 281-288.

50
UNCLASSIFIED / / b@ReGEebCiieetd GeO bli

----- PAGE BREAK -----

UNCLASSIFIED / / ROR-O58LGRAi=GE=OPiae

[108] Gogohia, V., “Energy From The Nonperturbative QCD Vacuum,”
http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/hep-ph/pdf/0508224.pdf (cited 22 Aug. 2005, revised 7
March 2008).

[109] Novello, M., Visser, M., and Volovik, G. (eds.), Artificial Black Holes, World
Scientific, New Jersey, 2002.

[110] Volovik, G. E., The Universe in a Droplet of Helium, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
2003.

[111] Wilczek, F., The Lightness of Being: Mass, Ether, and the Unification of Forces,
Basic Books, New York, 2008.

[112] Marecki, P., “Balanced homodyne detectors and Casimir energy densities,”
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, Vol. 41, 2008, 164037.

[113] Leonhardt, U., and Philbin, T. G., “Quantum levitation by left-handed
metamaterials,” New Journal of Physics, Vol. 9, 2007, p. 254.

[114] Law, C. K., “Resonance Response of the Quantum Vacuum to an Oscillating
Boundary,” Physical Review Letters, Vol. 73, 1994, pp. 1931-1934.

51
UNCLASSIFIED / /GRa@EEEGhildSE- OD

----- END OF DOCUMENT -----
