                             PERFORMANCE WORK STATEMENT (PWS)
                                        April 25,2022

    Specialized and Sensitive Administrative, Security, Policy, Operations, and Analytic Support
                Services to the Influence and Perception Management Office (IPMO)
                Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security


                                                     Part 1

                                             General Information

I. GENERAL:

This is a non-personal services contract to provide specialized and sensitive administrative, security, policy,
operations, and analytic, support to the Influence and Perception Management Office (IPMO) within the
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, Intelligence and Security (OUSD(I&S)). The Government shall
not exercise any supervision or control over the contract service providers performing the services herein.
Such contract service providers shall be accountable solely to the Contractor who, in turn is responsible to
the Government.

1.1 Description of Services/Introduction: The contractor shall provide all personnel, equipment, supplies,
facilities, transportation, tools, materials, supervision, and other items and non-personal services necessary
to perform specialized and sensitive administrative, security, policy, operational, and analytic support to the
IPMO as defined in this Performance Work Statement except for those items specified as government
furnished property and services. The contractor shall perform to the standards in this contract.

1.2 Background: The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) is the principal
staff assistant and advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the Deputy Secretary of Defense on intelligence,
counterintelligence, security, sensitive activities, and other intelligence-related matters. The USD(I&S)
exercises the Secretary of Defense's authority, direction, and control over the Defense Agencies and DoD
Field Activities that are Defense intelligence, counterintelligence, or security Components and exercises
planning, policy, and strategic oversight over all DoD intelligence, counterintelligence, and security policy,
plans, and programs. Among other organizations, the USD(I&S) is supported by the Director for Defense
Intelligence (Collection and Special Programs) (DDI (C&SP)), who is supported by the Director of the
IPMO for all influence and perception management related matters.

1.3 Objectives: The IPMO will develop broad thematic influence guidance focused on key adversaries;
promulgate competitive influence strategies focused on specific defense issues, which direct subordinate
planning efforts for the conduct of influence-related activities; and fill existing gaps in policy, oversight,
governance, and integration related to influence and perception management matters.

1.4 Scope: The contractor shall provide specialized and sensitive administrative, security, policy,
operational, and analytic, support including the development of strategy and policy, and the conduct of
oversight, governance, and integration related to influence and perception management matters conducted
by all DoD components. The contractor shall provide wide ranging specialized and sensitive administrative
and operational program support at the direction of the Director of the IPMO.

1.5 Period of Performance: The period of performance shall be for one (1) Base Period of 12 months.

1.6 General Information

1.6.1 Quality Control: The contractor shall develop and maintain an effective quality control program to
ensure services are performed in accordance with this PWS. The contractor shall develop and implement
procedures to identify, prevent, and ensure non-recurrence of defective services. The contractor's quality
control program is the means by which he assures himself that his work complies with the requirement of
the contract. The contractor will deliver a quality assurance plan (QAP) to the COR within 30 days after
contract award. After review by the COR and acceptance of the quality control plan, the contractor shall
receive the contracting officer's acceptance in writing of any proposed change to his QC system.

The contractor will provide a monthly status report (MSR) no later than the 10th of every month accurately
reflecting progress and a summary status of the tasks outlined in paragraph 5. The MSR shall identify
accomplishments, address any issues encountered, and include a table quantifying cumulative number of
actions that have been processed (e.g. meetings, policy revisions, reviews, inspections, reports, briefmgs,
staff packages, administrative transactions, site visits, and any other reports or activities that demonstrate
performance of the tasks listed under paragraph 5 and progress toward the objectives in paragraph 1.3).
The MSR shall also include:
         •         Description of work completed and plans for the next two months
         •        Summary of Meetings between Contract Managers/PMs and the COR or other
                   GPOC/Program Leads.
         •         Resource status
         •         Manning Status and related metrics.
         •        Travel conducted/projected
The MSR shall be provided in Microsoft word format and shall include the items listed above and other
quality measures/metrics from the QAP or other information as requested by the COR.

1.6.2 Quality Assurance: The government shall evaluate the contractor's performance under this contract
in accordance with the Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan (QASP). This plan is primarily focused on
what the Government must do to ensure that the contractor has performed in accordance with the
performance standards. It defines how the performance standards will be applied, the frequency of
surveillance, and the minimum acceptable defect rate(s).

1.6.3 Recognized Holidays: Contractor personnel are not customarily expected to work on holidays, but
holiday work is possible, subject to advance scheduling with the contractor. Recognized Federal holidays
are as follows:

New Year's Day                                         Labor Day
Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday                      Columbus Day
President's Day                                        Veteran's Day
Memorial Day                                           Thanksgiving Day
Juneteenth Independence Day                            Christmas Day
Independence Day

1.6.4 Hours of Operation: The contractor is responsible for conducting business during OUSD(I&S) normal
work hours from 8:30a.m. to 5:00p.m. Monday thru Friday. Contractor personnel typically work eight (8)
hours per day, 40 hours per week, with starting times normally no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and end times
normally no later than 6:00 p.m. as authorized by the Director of the IPMO. This excludes Federal holidays
or when the Government facility is closed due to local or national emergencies, administrative closings, or
similar Government directed facility closings. For other than firm fixed price contracts, the contractor will
not be reimbursed when the government facility is closed for the above reasons. The Contractor must at all
times maintain an adequate workforce for the uninterrupted performance of all tasks defined within this PWS
when the Government facility is not closed for the above reasons. When hiring personnel, the Contractor
shall keep in mind that the stability and continuity of the workforce are essential.

1.6.4.1 When the Government grants administrative leave to Government employees, or is closed as a
result of inclement weather, potentially hazardous conditions, or other special circumstances, the
Contractor's program manager and/or on-site manager shall coordinate with the Contracting Officer and/or
Contracting Officer Representative (COR) on the work status of personnel, to the extent that the overall
performance is not adversely impacted.
1.6.5 Place of Performance: The work to be performed under this contract will be performed at Crystal
City, Arlington, VA; Pentagon, Arlington, VA; Mark Center, Alexandria, VA; or other government sites
within the National Capital Region. Telework is generally not appropriate for the tasks associated with this
contract but may be considered on a situational/ad hoc basis at an approved alternate worksite. Telework
must be authorized in writing by the COR, DDI Chief of Staff, and the senior government program
manager. The contractor will highlight in monthly status reporting telework hours and activities for
contractor personnel that conduct telework on behalf of the government.

1.6.6 Type of Contract: The government will award a hybrid contract that consist of Labor Hour and Time
and Materials (T&M)feentrnet.

1.6.7 Security Requirements: The contractor shall have a Top Secret Facility Clearance from Defense
Counterintelligence & Security Agency (DCSA) at the time of proposal submission, and maintain the level
for the life of the contract. The Contractor shall fully comply with all security requirements established for
this Contract in the associated "Contract Security Classification Specification" (DoD Form 254). All tasks
shall be conducted in full compliance with DoD security regulations. All personnel are required to have a
Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) clearance with eligibility for immediate access
prior to performing work on this contract. Personnel must also maintain eligibility for access to Special
Access Programs (SAP) for all tasks. The contractor personnel must maintain this level of security for the
life of the contract.

1.6.7.1 SCI eligibility, as defined by the Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 704, Eligibility for
Access to SCI, and reinforced in the DoD Manual 5105.21, Volume 3 is considered "in scope" for
personnel security investigations (Tier 5, Tier 5 Reinvestigation) and access determinations that are void of
deviations, conditions, or waivers. ICD 704.4 defines "in scope investigations" as those that are less than
seven years old, without a 24 month break in service. To preserve reciprocity, the subject reinvestigation
must be in progress within seven years from the completion of the previous investigation.

1.6.7.2 Security policy for the protection of SAP information will follow the provisions of DoD Directive
5205.07, Special Access Program Policy, and DoD Instruction 5205.11, Management, Administration, and
Oversight of DoD SAPs, including associated DoD Manuals 5205.07, Volumes 1 through 4, and applies on
all OUSD(I&S) SAP efforts.

Continuous Evaluation (CE): The OUSD(I) Memorandum, "Department of Defense Guidance for the
Implementation of Measures to Reduce the Federal Government's Background Investigation Inventory in
Fiscal Year 2018", July 27,2018 allows for the deferment of investigations and enrollment in CE. If a
subject appears out of scope consistent with ICD 704, CE enrollment can be confirmed in the Defense
Information System for Security (DISS) or Scattered Castles (SC). Once confirmed, the subject's most
recent SCI eligibility applies.

The Contractor shall submit a security nomination package to the COR for the personnel assigned to the
task order for OUSD(I&S) Security verification prior to performing work on this contract.

In the event that required special accesses are not adjudicated within 45 days for any individual assigned to
this task order, the Government will require the Contractor to remove the individual from this task order
and provide a replacement meeting the requirements of this PWS.

All contractor personnel shall be required to sign a Classified Information Non-Disclosure Agreement (SF-
312).

1.6.7.1 Physical Security: The contractor shall be responsible for safeguarding all government equipment,
information and property provided for contractor use. At the close of each work period, government
facilities, equipment, and materials shall be secured.

1.6.7.2 Key Control: The Contractor shall establish and implement methods of making sure all keys/key
cards issued to the Contractor by the Government are not lost or misplaced and are not used by
unauthorized persons. NOTE: All references to keys include key cards. No keys issued to the Contractor
by the Government shall be duplicated. The Contractor shall develop procedures covering key control that
shall be included in the Quality Control Plan. Such procedures shall include turn-in of any issued keys by
personnel who no longer require access to locked areas. The Contractor shall immediately report any
occurrences of lost or duplicate keys/key cards to the Contracting Officer.

1.6.7.2.1. In the event keys, other than master keys, are lost or duplicated, the Contractor shall, upon
direction of the Contracting Officer, re-key or replace the affected lock or locks; however, the Government,
at its option, may replace the affected lock or locks or perform re-keying. When the replacement of locks
or re-keying is performed by the Government, the total cost of re-keying or the replacement of the lock or
locks shall be deducted from the monthly payment due the Contractor. In the event a master key is lost or
duplicated, all locks and keys for that system shall be replaced by the Government and the total cost
deducted from the monthly payment due the Contractor.

1.6.7.2.2. The Contractor shall prohibit the use of Government issued keys/key cards by any persons other
than the Contractor's employees. The Contractor shall prohibit the opening of locked areas by Contractor
employees to permit entrance of persons other than Contractor employees engaged in the performance of
assigned work in those areas, or personnel authorized entrance by the Contracting Officer.

1.6.7.3 Lock Combinations: Contractor shall establish and implement methods of ensuring that all lock
combinations are not revealed to unauthorized persons. The Contractor shall ensure that lock combinations
are changed when personnel having access to the combinations no longer have a need to know such
combinations. These procedures shall be included in the Contractor's Quality Control Plan.

1.6.8 Post Award Conference/Periodic Progress Meetings: The Contractor agrees to attend any post award
conference convened by the contracting activity or contract administration office in accordance with
Federal Acquisition Regulation Subpart 42.5. The contracting officer, Contracting Officers Representative
(COR), and other Government personnel, as appropriate, may meet periodically with the contractor to
review the contractor's performance. At these meetings the contracting officer will apprise the contractor
of how the government views the contractor's performance and the contractor will apprise the Government
of problems, if any, being experienced. Appropriate action shall be taken to resolve outstanding issues.
These meetings shall be at no additional cost to the government.

1.6.9 Contracting Officer Representative (COR): The COR will be identified by separate letter. The COR
monitors all technical aspects of the contract and assists in contract administration The COR is authorized
to perform the following functions: assure that the Contractor performs the technical requirements of the
contract: perform inspections necessary in connection with contract performance: maintain written and
verbal communications with the Contractor concerning technical aspects of the contract: issue written
interpretations of technical requirements, including Government drawings, designs, specifications: monitor
Contractor's performance and notifies both the Contracting Officer and Contractor of any deficiencies;
coordinate availability of government furnished property, and provide site entry of Contractor personnel. A
letter of designation issued to the COR, a copy of which is sent to the Contractor, states the responsibilities
and limitations of the COR, especially with regard to changes in cost or price, estimates or changes in
delivery dates. The COR is not authorized to change any of the terms and conditions of the resulting order.

1.6.10 The contractor shall provide an on-site contract task lead who shall be responsible for the
performance of the work. The name of this person and an alternate who shall act for the contractor when
the task lead is absent shall be designated in writing to the COR. The on-site contract task lead or alternate
shall have full authority to act for the contractor on all contract matters relating to daily operation of this
contract. The on-site contract task lead or alternate shall be available between 0900 and 1500 hours,
Monday thru Friday except Federal holidays or when the government facility is closed for administrative
reasons.

1.6.11 Key Personnel: Before replacing any individual designated as Key by the Government, the
Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer no less than 10 business days in advance, submit written
justification for replacement, and provide the name and qualifications of any proposed substitute(s). All
proposed substitutes shall possess qualifications equal to or superior to those of the Key person being
replaced, unless otherwise approved by the Contracting Officer. The Contractor shall not
replace Key Contractor personnel without written approval from the Contracting Officer and
Contracting Officer Representative (COR). The following personnel are considered key personnel by the
government: Senior Executive Administrator; Senior Administrative Operations Manager; Senior
Operations Specialist/Contract Task Lead; Senior Special Security and Compartmented Program Specialist;
and Senior Operations Specialist. Qualifications of select key personnel are listed below:

1.6.11.1 Senior Administrative Operations Manager (PWS Task 5.3)

Required Education and Certification:
•  Degree: Bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited institution

Preferred Education and Certification:
•   Degree: Master's degree from a regionally accredited institution
•   Certification: Project Management or Program Management Professional
•   Certification: Lean Six Sigma Green or Black Belt

Required Skills and Relevant Experience:
•  Active IS security clearance with immediate SCI eligibility upon award
•  Experience with working in a fast-paced, dynamic environment with tight deadlines and competing
   requirements with organizational, planning, and time management responsibilities.
•  Senior level operations management, administrative management, or project management experience
   within the past five years.

Preferred Skills and Relevant Experience:
•   Minimum of 5-10 years of operations management, administrative management, or project
    management experience.
•   Strong written and oral communications skills. Experience identifying stakeholders, fostering           Commented (1/1iNNCVJA(1]: This needs to be removed as
    collaboration, leading groups, developing and advocating positions, and negotiating compromises in a    can't assess strong written and oral communication skills in a
    multifinictional environment.                                                                           vendor resume.
•   Ability to develop and maintain personal and professional contacts with senior civilian and military
    leaders and officials within DoD, the IC, interagency, National Security council, executive branch
    appointees, members of Congress and their respective staffs, and other government agencies.
•   Knowledge and experience with the Planning, Program, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE) phases of
    the DoD budget.
•   Knowledge and experience with Operation & Maintenance and Research, Development, Test &
    Evaluation appropriations.

1.6.11.2 Senior Operations Specialist and Contract Task Lead (PWS Task 5.4)

Required Education and Certification:
•  Degree: Bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited institution

Preferred Education and Certification:
•   Degree: Master's degree from a regionally accredited institution
•   Certification: Project Management or Program Management Professional
•   Certification: Lean Six Sigma Green or Black Belt

Required Skills and Relevant Experience:
•  Active TS security clearance with immediate SCI eligibility upon award
•  Minimum of 2 years of senior level operations management, administrative management, or project
   management experience.
•  Minimum 2 years' experience leading, directing, managing, or supervising subordinates.
•   Experience working in a fast-paced, dynamic environment with tight deadlines and competing
    requirements with organizational, planning, and time management responsibilities.

Preferred Skills and Relevant Experience:
•   Minimum of 5 years of senior level operations management, administrative management, or project
    management experience.
•   Knowledge of DoD, Intelligence Community (IC), and interagency organizations and their functional
    relationships, programs, and policies.
•   Experience in and knowledge of policy development, program oversight, guidance, capabilities
    development, and resourcing requirements.
•   Ability to support management and oversight of sensitive DoD and IC compartmented programs.
•   Strong written and oral communications skills. Have the ability to identify stakeholders, foster          Commented [ANNNCVVA(2]: See previous comment
    collaboration, lead groups, develop and advocate positions, and negotiate compromises in a
    multifunctional environment.
•   Ability to develop and maintain personal and professional contacts with senior civilian and military
    leaders and officials within DoD, the IC, interagency, National Security council, executive branch
    appointees, members of Congress and their respective staffs, and other government agencies.
•   Experience in leading groups, negotiating compromises, and influencing key leaders, customers and
    stakeholders involving problems or public policy issues that have great sensitivity, including national
    or international consequence.
•   Knowledge and experience with the Planning, Program, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE) phases of
    the DoD budget.
•   Knowledge and experience with Operation & Maintenance and Research, Development, Test &
    Evaluation appropriations.

1.6.11.3 Senior Operations Specialist (PWS Task 5.6)

Required Education and Certification:
•  Degree: Bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited institution

Preferred Education and Certification:
•   Degree: Master's degree from a regionally accredited institution
•   Certification: Project Management or Program Management Professional
•   Certification: Lean Six Sigma Green or Black Belt

Required Skills and Relevant Experience:
•  Active TS security clearance with immediate SCI eligibility upon award
•  Senior level operations management, administrative management, or project management experience
   within the past five years.

Preferred Skills and Relevant Experience:
•   Minimum of 5 years of senior level operations management, administrative management, or project
    management experience.
•   Knowledge of DoD, Intelligence Community (IC), and interagency organizations and their functional
    relationships, programs, and policies.
•   Experience in and knowledge of policy development, program oversight, guidance, capabilities
    development, and resourcing requirements.
•   Experience supporting management and oversight of sensitive DoD and IC compartmented programs.
•   Experience working in a fast-paced, dynamic environment with tight deadlines and competing
    requirements with organizational, planning, and time management responsibilities.
•   Strong written and oral communications skills. Have the ability to identify stakeholders, foster          Commented [WNNCWA(3]: See previous comment
    collaboration, lead groups, develop and advocate positions, and negotiate compromises in a
    multifunctional environment.
•   Ability to develop and maintain personal and professional contacts with senior civilian and military
    leaders and officials within DoD, the IC, interagency, National Security council, executive branch
    appointees, members of Congress and their respective staffs, and other government agencies.
•   Experience leading groups, negotiating compromises, and influencing key leaders, customers and
    stakeholders involving problems or public policy issues that have great sensitivity, including national
    or international consequence.
•   Knowledge and experience with the Planning, Program, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE) phases of
    the DoD budget.
•   Knowledge and experience with Operation & Maintenance and Research, Development, Test &
    Evaluation appropriations.

1.6.12 Identification of Contractor Employees: All contract personnel attending meetings, answering
Government telephones, and working in other situations where their contractor status is not obvious to third
parties are required to identify themselves as such to avoid creating an impression in the minds of members
of the public that they are Government officials. They must also ensure that all documents, reports, and
correspondence (e.g. email) produced by contractors are suitably marked as contractor products or that
contractor participation is appropriately disclosed.

1.6.13 Contractor Travel: In accordance with FAR 31.205-46, Travel Cost, the contractor shall provide
travel in support of this contract. The contractor shall provide a written request to the Contracting Officer
Representative (COR) for approval prior to making any travel arrangements. Requests for travel shall
include the name of the person(s) traveling, travel destination, dates of travel, mode of transportation, and
estimated costs for travel. All travel must be pre-approved in writing by the COR prior to purchase of any
tickets and commencement of travel. The Contractor shall be reimbursed for actual allowable, allocable,
and reasonable travel cost incurred during performance efforts in accordance with FAR 31.205-46.
Contractor travel will be a Time-and-Material CLIN.                                                               Commented DNNNCVJA(4]: I've added this language as
                                                                                                                  we need to ensure the contractor is aware of the regulation
1.6.13.1Contractor personnel may be required to travel CONUS, OCONUS, and within the National                     that
Capital Region (NCR) during the performance of this contract to attend meetings, conferences, training,
staff assistance visits, and liaison support. Contractor will be authorized travel expenses consistent with the
substantive provisions of the Federal Travel Regulation (F3TR) and the limitation of funds specified in this
contract. All travel requires Government approval/authorization and must be authorized in advance by the
COR. Contractor travel within 50 miles of the NCR is not considered reimbursable.

1.6.14 Other Direct Costs: Contractor will be required to provide parking to all IPMO employed,
assigned, or detailed personnel when the Director of the IPMO determines that additional parking
facilities or accesses are necessary to avoid a significant impairment of the IPMO's operating efficiency.
The contactor will submit a parking plan and quote prior to payment for approval by the IPMO
Director. The total cost for parking shall not exceed $35,000.00.                                                 Commented 1111iNNCVVA(5): Per my initial comments
                                                                                                                  and our meeting, this section was to pay for contractor
                                                                                                                  parking (which I don't believe we should be spelling out
1.6.15 Organizational Conflict of Interest: Contractor and subcontractor personnel performing work under          specifically, but i) This reads as we're giving parking to
this contract may receive, have access to or participate in the development of proprietary or source              Government employee, and we can't do that. We discussed
selection information (e.g., cost or pricing information, budget information or analyses, specifications or       this matter in the meeting with Legal. This reads unclearly.
work statements, etc.) or perform evaluation services which may create a current or subsequent                    This needs to be updated. reads u
Organizational Conflict of Interests (OCI) as defined in FAR Subpart 9.5. The Contractor shall notify the
Contracting Officer immediately whenever it becomes aware that such access or participation may result in
any actual or potential OCI and shall promptly submit a plan to the Contracting Officer to avoid or mitigate
any such OCI. The Contractor's mitigation plan will be determined to be acceptable solely at the discretion
of the Contracting Officer and in the event the Contracting Officer unilaterally determines that any such
OCI cannot be satisfactorily avoided or mitigated, the Contracting Officer may affect other remedies as he
or she deems necessary, including prohibiting the Contractor from participation in subsequent contracted
requirements which may be affected by the OCI.

In addition to the NDA required as a condition of access to classified information (para 1.6.7.), contractor
personnel engaged in delivering support services to OUSD(I&S) will sign a NDA to protect and prevent
access to and disclosure of nonpublic information


1.6.16 Phase out Period: The Contractor shall provide a phase-out plan within sixty (60) days prior to
expiration of this contract. The Contractor shall maintain complete documentation accessible to designated
Government representatives as the Government directs. The Contractor will work with Government
personnel and the incoming contractor to transfer knowledge, information and documentation for all
projects and tasks related to this contract.

The information and documentation to be transferred includes but is not limited to:
•   Historical Files
•   Current Work/Staff Packages
•   File Management Plan
•   SOPs/TTPs developed or maintained by the contractor.
•   Assessment of potential transition risks, issues, and mitigation strategies.                                 Commented [VVNNCWA(61: OUSDI stated they don't
                                                                                                                 have a Phase In/Phase Out plan. If we're going to keep it,
1.6.17 Limitation on Subcontracting Reporting: The contractor shall comply with FAR 52.219-14,                   then we need to ensure we have FAR 52.237-3, Continuity
Limitation of Subcontracting that's listed in the contract, and submit yearly report at the end of each period   of Services clause in the contract.
of performance.                                                                                                  Formatted: Indent Left: 0"
                                                PART 2
                                       DEFINITIONS & ACRONYMS

2. DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS:

2.1. DEFINITIONS:

2.1.1. CONTRACTOR. A supplier or vendor awarded a contract to provide specific supplies or service to
the government. The term used in this contract refers to the prime.

2.1.2. CONTRACTING OFFICER. A person with authority to enter into, administer, and or terminate
contracts, and make related determinations and findings on behalf of the government. Note: The only
individual who can legally bind the government.

2.1.3. CONTRACTING OFFICER'S REPRESENTATIVE (COR). An employee of the U.S. Government
appointed by the contracting officer to administer the contract. Such appointment shall be in writing and
shall state the scope of authority and limitations. This individual has authority to provide technical
direction to the Contractor as long as that direction is within the scope of the contract, does not constitute a
change, and has no funding implications. This individual does NOT have authority to change the terms and
conditions of the contract.

2.1.4. DEFECTIVE SERVICE. A service output that does not meet the standard of performance
associated with the Performance Work Statement.

2.1.5. DELIVERABLE. Anything that can be physically delivered, but may include non-manufactured
things such as meeting minutes or reports.

2.1.6. KEY PERSONNEL. Contractor personnel that are evaluated in a source selection process and that
may be required to be used in the performance of a contract by the Key Personnel listed in the PWS. When
key personnel are used as an evaluation factor in best value procurement, an offer can be rejected if it does
not have a firm commitment from the persons that are listed in the proposal.

2.1.7. PHYSICAL SECURITY. Actions that prevent the loss or damage of Government property.

2.1.8. QUALITY ASSURANCE. The government procedures to verify that services being performed by
the Contractor are performed according to acceptable standards.

2.1.9. QUALITY ASSURANCE Surveillance Plan (QASP). An organized written document specifying
the surveillance methodology to be used for surveillance of contractor performance.

2.1.10. QUALITY CONTROL. All necessary measures taken by the Contractor to assure that the quality
of an end product or service shall meet contract requirements.

2.1.11. SUBCONTRACTOR. One that enters into a contract with a prime contractor. The Government
does not have privity of contract with the subcontractor.

2.1.12. WORK DAY. The number of hours per day the Contractor provides services in accordance with
the contract.

2.1.12. WORK WEEK. Monday through Friday, unless specified otherwise.

2.2. ACRONYMS:

ACOR                        Alternate Contracting Officer's Representative
BCTF                        Boards, Commissions, and Task Forces
CFR           Code of Federal Regulations
CONUS         Continental United States (excludes Alaska and Hawaii)
COR           Contracting Officer Representative
COTR          Contracting Officer's Technical Representative
COTS          Commercial-Off-the-Shelf
DD Form 254   Department of Defense Contract Security Requirement List
DFARS         Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement
DMDC          Defense Manpower Data Center
DOD           Department of Defense
EM            Enterprise Management Directorate
FAR           Federal Acquisition Regulation
HIPAA         Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
IPM0          Influence and Perception Management Office
KO            Contracting Officer
OCI           Organizational Conflict of Interest
OCONUS        Outside Continental United States (includes Alaska and Hawaii)
ODC           Other Direct Costs
OUSD(I&S)     Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence & Security
PIPO          Phase-In/Phase-Out
POC           Point of Contact
PRS           Performance Requirements Summary
PWS           Performance Work Statement
QA            Quality Assurance
QAP           Quality Assurance Program
QASP          Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan
QC            Quality Control
QCP           Quality Control Program
TE            Technical Exhibit
WHS           Washington Headquarters Services
                                     PART 3
              GOVERNMENT FURNISHED PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT, AND SERVICES

3. GOVERNMENT FURNISHED ITEMS AND SERVICES: Basic facilities such as
work space and its associated operating requirements (i.e., phones, desks, utilities, information technology,
and consumable and general purpose office supplies) will be provided while working in Government
facilities. The Government will provide information, material and forms unique to the Government for
supporting the task. All Government unique information related to this requirement, which is necessary for
Contractor performance, will be made available to the Contractor.
                                         PART 4
                         CONTRACTOR FURNISHED ITEMS AND SERVICES

4. CONTRACTOR FURNISHED ITEMS AND RESPONSIBILITIES:

4.1 General: The Contractor shall furnish all supplies, equipment, facilities and services required to
perform work under this contract that are not listed under Section 3 of this PWS.
                                                PART 5
                                            SPECIFIC TASKS

5. Specific Tasks:

5.1. Basic Services. The contractor shall provide services for specialized and sensitive administrative,
security, policy, operational, and analytic, support to the IPMO. The contractor shall perform the tasks
listed below.

5.2. Executive Administrative Support (Senier—gweative-Administrative-Supportr I-FTE)                        Commented DIVNNCVJA(7]: We don't need to identify
In support of the Influence and Perception Management Office, the contractor shall:                          the number of FTEs at each task title. The number of FTEs
•    Serve as the front facing point of contact for the IPMO, ensuring external engagements are              should be identified in the estimated workload table.
     accomplished in a timely and professional manner.
•    Maintain IPMO leadership's daily calendars, and arrange meetings, conferences, and video-
     teleconferences to include actual meeting management, recording minutes, and maintaining invitations
     and attendee contact rosters.
•    Prepare and oversee travel arrangements for IPMO personnel, assist with developing travel reports and
     travel vouchers ensuring reimbursement for expenses incurred, and assist with acquisition and renewal
     of parking permits.
•    Review, monitor, and report the status of action item, activities, and products using the
     Correspondence and Task Management System (CATMS) and Joint Staff Action Processing (JSAP)
     System.
•    Answer phones, maintain office files and the office filing system, and track action items in the
     OUSD(I&S) suspense portal; use knowledge of administrative management, automation equipment,
     and/or various software packages to input, retrieve, compile, and manage information.

5.3. Administrative Operations Management Support (Senior Administrative Operations Manager, 1
FTE — Key Personnel)                                                                                         Commented [VVNNCVVA(8]: See previous comment.
In support of the Influence and Perception Management Office, the contractor shall:
•    Provide support to IPMO personnel for all required correspondence actions (e.g. formal letters,
     memorandum, read-ahead briefing/meeting packages, activity reports, senior leadership reports).
     Tasks may include technical writing/editing, editorial consultation, proofreading, or overall
     documentation review.
•    Provide recommendations for increased efficiency and effectiveness in the conduct of strategy
     development, planning, policy development, oversight, and governance regarding all IPMO assigned
     authorities, roles, and responsibilities.
•    Support IPMO budget and cost analysis activities including, monitoring resources allocated to IPMO,
     providing advice on options available to IPMO, and preparing budget related matters for DIR IPMO
     review and decision. The Contractor may also be required to coordinate with OUSD(I&S) Budget
     officials external to IPMO to inform Dir IPMO decisions and recommendations.
•    Provide administrative transaction and management support for office related facilities, furniture,
     communications, and/or information technology requirements (e.g. submit requests and coordinate
     work orders approved by IPMO for support services).
•    Support IPMO with external engagements, including the Executive Office of the President, National
     Security Council, Congress, Military Departments, Combatant Commands, Defense Intelligence
     Components, OSD Components, non-DoD Federal Departments and Agencies, and Foreign Partners.

5.4. Policy, Operations, Analytic and Contract Task Lead Support (Senior Operations Specialist/
Contract Task Lead, 1 FTE — Key Personnel)                                                                   Commented l'INNNCWA(9]: See previous comment.
In support of the Influence and Perception Management Office, the contractor shall:
•    Serve as the primary contractor point of contact for IPMO leadership regarding contractor personnel
     related issues, including serving as an interlocutor with the contract Program Manager.
•    Assist IPMO leadership with the assignment of contractor personnel required to accomplish key tasks
     identified by IPMO leadership.
•   Ensure timeliness and accuracy of deliverables associated with all tasks listed in Para 5 of the PWS
    consistent with the performance requirements in TECHNICAL EXHIBIT 1.
•   Assist IPMO leadership in the development and promulgation of strategy, plans, and policy for DoD
    influence, deception, and perception management related operations, activities, and investments.
•   Assist IPMO leadership in the conduct of oversight and governance, to include staff assistance visits
    and compliance inspections, for DoD influence, deception, and perception management related
    operations, activities, and investments.
•   Develop and coordinate staff packages that include time-sensitive requirements for IPMO leadership to
    enable DoD influence, deception, and perception management related operations, activities, and
    investments.
•   Develop and maintain positive working relationships with counterparts across the DoD, including the
    Joint Staff, other OSD organizations, DoD Components, Military Departments, and Combatant
    Commands.
•   Produce and disseminate reports and briefmgs that detail DoD influence, deception, and perception
    management related operations, activities, and investments for Congress and Senior Executive Branch
    officials.

5.5. Special Security and Compartmented Program Support (Senior Special Security and Special
Access Security Manager, I FIE)                                                                                 Commented [INNNCWA(10]: See previous comment.
In support of the Influence and Perception Management Office, the contractor shall:
•    Serve as the Contract Program Security Officer (CPSO) and subject matter expert for special security
     and special access program support in a sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF) and/or
     special access program facility (SAPF)
•    Monitor access to SCIF/SAPF, and IPMO compliance with physical and administrative security
     requirements for the IPMO SCIF/SAPF.
•    Develop and establish professional working relationships with the OUSD(I&S) Special Access
     Program Central Office, Special Security Office, National Programs Directorate, Special Technical
     Operations Branch, and the National Security Agency Central Security Service Representative.
     Coordinate with these activities as required for guidance, direction, and resolution of security related
     issues and requirements
•    Coordinate IPMO personnel clearance verifications, visit request requirements, and provide security
     briefings for IPMO visitors and meetings.
•    Initiate and Coordinate Program Access Requests (PARS) and provide access briefings when PARs are
     approved
•    Facilitate Alternate Compensatory Control Measure (ACCM) accesses as required.
•    Update and maintain classified access management systems of record (e.g. Scattered Castles, Joint
     Access Database Environment, Defense Information System for Security) as required and authorized
•    Coordinate IPMO facility, equipment, communications, and information technology needs specific to
     SCIF/SAPF requirements, including preparation for and assistance during required security
     inspections.
•    Maintain records for control and accountability of classified correspondence, and other material
     received in the office, making distribution to appropriate members of the IPMO staff. Ensure IPMO
     records are marked, filed, and retained in accordance with the federal records disposition schedule
     approved by the National Archives and Records Administration.

5.6. Policy, Operations, and Analytic Support (Senior Operations Specialist, 7 FTEs — Key Personnel)            Commented [INNNCWA(11]: See previous comment.
In support of the Influence and Perception Management Office, the contractor shall:
•    Assist IPMO leadership in the development and promulgation of strategy, plans, and policy for DoD
     influence, deception, and perception management related operations, activities, and investments.
•    Assist IPMO leadership in the conduct of oversight and governance, to include staff assistance visits
     and compliance inspections, for DoD influence, deception, and perception management related
     operations, activities, and investments.
•    Develop and coordinate staff packages that include time-sensitive requirements for IPMO leadership to
     enable DoD influence, deception, and perception management related operations, activities, and
     investments.
•   Develop and maintain positive working relationships with counterparts across the DoD, including the
    Joint Staff, other OSD organizations, DoD Components, Military Departments, and Combatant
    Commands.
•   Produce and disseminate reports and briefmgs that detail DoD influence, deception, and perception
    management related operations, activities, and investments for Congress and Senior Executive Branch
    officials.

5.7. Administrative and Information Technology Support (Facilities/IT Manager, 1 FIE)                            Commented [INNNCVVA(12): See previous comment
In support of the Influence and Perception Management Office, the contractor shall:
•    Serve as primary 'PM° liaison to Washington Headquarters Services (WHS) to provide administrative
     and management support for office related facilities, furniture, communications, and/or information
     technology requirements (e.g. submit requests and coordinate work orders approved by IPMO for
     support services).
•    Provide IT support across a wide range of technical services including supporting remote sites,
     preforming cabling and desktop installation, systems administration, VTC operations, managing
     cryptography keys, and hardware and software troubleshooting.
•    Provide IPM0 on-site desk-side support services including account and access management, tailoring
     directory service entries, mailbox management, supporting equipment installation, move, and change
     requests, and troubleshooting end-user devices and peripherals.
•    Submit, monitor, and approve MAXIMO requests, manage service calls and monitor requests for
     building service-related requirements.
•    Perform administrative, executive support, and security services as required by the contract task lead or
     IPM0 leadership. Primary duties are in support of IPM0 personnel, but general support may be
     provided for other OUSD(I&S) requirements as requested by the OUSD(I&S) Chief of Staff and
     authorized by the Director, IPM0.

5.8 Operations Specialist for Influence and Perception Management Office — OPTIONAL
(Operations Specialist, Not-to-Exceed 5 FTEs)                                                                    Commented IWNNCWA(13]: See previous comment
In support of the Influence and Perception Management Office, the contractor shall:
•    Assist IPM0 leadership in the development and promulgation of strategy, plans, and policy for DoD
     influence, deception, and perception management related operations, activities, and investments.
•    Assist 'PM° leadership in the conduct of oversight and governance, to include staff assistance visits
     and compliance inspections, for DoD influence, deception, and perception management related
     operations, activities, and investments.
•    Develop and coordinate staff packages that include time-sensitive requirements for IPM0 leadership to
     enable DoD influence, deception, and perception management related operations, activities, and
     investments.
•    Develop and maintain positive working relationships with counterparts across the DoD, including the
     Joint Staff, other OSD organizations, DoD Components, Military Departments, and Combatant
     Commands.
•    Produce and disseminate reports and briefmgs that detail DoD influence, deception, and perception
     management related operations, activities, and investments for Congress and Senior Executive Branch
     officials.
                                            PART 6
                                    APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS

6. APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS (CURRENT EDITIONS

6.1. The Contractor must abide by all applicable regulations, publications, manuals, and local policies and
procedures.
6.2. The following documents are cited in the security requirements stipulated in para 1.6.7 "Security
Requirements" in this PWS.
6.2.1. Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 704, "Personnel Security Standards and Procedures
Governing Eligibility for Access to Sensitive Compartmented Information and Other Controlled Access
Program Information" (1 October 2008)
6.2.2. ICD 704.4 "Reciprocity of Personnel Security Clearance and Access Determinations, (20 June 2018)
6.2.3. DoD Manual 5105.21, Volume 3 "Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) Administrative
Security Manual: Administration of Personnel Security, Industrial Security, and Special Activities (19
October 2012)
6.2.4. DoD Manual 5205.07, Volumes 1 "DoD Special Access Program (SAP) Security Manual: General
Procedures" (18 June 2015)
6.2.5. DoD Manual 5205.07, Volumes 2, "Special Access Program (SAP) Security Manual: Personnel
Security" (24 November 2015)
6.2.6. DoD Manual 5205.07, Volumes 3, "DoD Special Access Program (SAP) Security Manual: Physical
Security" (23 April 2015)
6.2.7. DoD Manual 5205.07, Volumes 4, "6.2.6. DoD Manual 5205.07, Volumes 3" (10 October 2013)
6.2.8. DoD Instruction 5205.11, "Management, Administration, and Oversight of DoD Special Access
Programs(SAPs)" (6 Feb 2013)
6.2.9. OUSD(I) Memorandum, "Department of Defense Guidance for the Implementation of Measures to
Reduce the Federal Government's Background Investigation Inventory in Fiscal Year 2018" (July 27,2018)
                                       PART 7
                         ATTACHMENT/TECHNICAL EXHIBIT LISTING

7.   Attachment/Technical Exhibit List:

7.1. Attachment 1/Technical Exhibit 1 — Performance Requirements Summary

7.2. Attachment 2/Technical Exhibit 2— Deliverables Schedule

7.3. Attachment 3/Technical Exhibit 3 — Estimated Workload Data
                                                    TECHNICAL EXHIBIT 1

                                             Performance Requirements Summary


            The contractor service requirements are summarized into performance objectives that relate directly to
            mission essential items. The performance threshold briefly describes the minimum acceptable levels of
            service required for each requirement. These thresholds are critical to mission success.


        Performance Objective                                 rrHThR1i                       Performance Threshold               Method of
                                                                                                                                Surveillance

PRS # 1.                                  All contractor personnel possess the skills        All contractor personnel are      Periodic
The contractor shall provide qualified    and experience required to perform the             functional users of               Surveillance by
personal to successfully perform the      required tasks as specified in the PWS.            OUSD(I&S) systems and             COR/GPOC
tasks outlined in PWS Paragraph 5.                                                           processes within 2 weeks of           or
                                                                                             their start date.
                                                                                                                               Validated
                                                                                             The Contractor's work             Customer
                                                                                             products are suitable to          Complaint
                                                                                             support the full range of tasks   received by
                                                                                             specified in the PWS.             COR.

                                                                                             The contractor's personnel are
                                                                                             qualified and adept at
                                                                                             Presenting clear, concise, and
                                                                                             complete professional work
                                                                                             products free of substantive
                                                                                             errors, political conclusions,
                                                                                             or personal/individual bias.
PRS #2                                    Timelines in para 1.6.10 are met with no           100%                              Periodic
The contractor shall manage Key           more than al0 business daygap in support                                             Surveillance by
Personnel according to pars 1.6.10 of     for any key positions.                                                               COR/GPOC
the PWS.                                                                                                                           or
                                                                                                                               Validated
                                                                                                                               Customer
                                                                                                                               Complaint
                                                                                                                               received by
                                                                                                                               COR.
PRS #3                                    Contractor personnel will meet suspense's          100%                              Periodic
The contractor shall ensure timeliness    established by the PWS, GPOC or Contract                                             Surveillance by
and accuracy of deliverables associated   Task Lead on behalf of the GPOC. Work                                                COR/GPOC
with all tasks listed in Para 5 of the    product will be clear, concise, well written                                             Or
PWS or other deliverables specified in    and complete. Deliverables will be 99%                                               Validated
the PWS.                                  free of grammatical errors or misspellings, free                                     Customer
                                          of substantive errors, political conclusions                                         Complaint
                                          or personal/individual bias. No more than 2                                          received by
                                          submissions for rework per deliverable.                                              COR.
                                          Editorial and typographical errors should be
                                          few.
PRS #4 The contract program manager        The contract program manager will be           100%        Surveillance by
or alternate contract program manager      responsive in acknowledging urgent                         COR/GPOC.
shall be available and responsive as       matters on the same business day as
stipulated in para 1.6.10                  notified by the COR or Government
                                           Program Manager (or representative) or no
                                           later than noon of the next business day.
                                           For routine matters acknowledgement will
                                           be within 2 business days.
PRS #5                                     The contractor shall achieve full              I (i()" 0   Phase-In/Kick-
The contractor shall meet the phase in     operational capability for all tasks and                   Off Meeting
requirements stipulated in para 1.6.14     deliverables in the PWS by the end of the                      and
                                           30 day phase-in period                                     Surveillance by
                                                                                                      COR/GI Comm, nted (1/1/NNC1NA(14]: This needs be removed as 1
PRS #6                                     The contractor will provide a phase out        100%        Phase-0 we don'i have a phase-in plan.
The contractor shall meet the phase out    plan no later than 60 days before the end of               Meeting
requirements stipulated in para 1.6.16   the contract and will work with                                and
                                           Government personnel and the incoming                      Surveillance by
                                           contractor to support a smooth transition.                 COR/GPOC
                                    TECHNICAL EXHIBIT 2

                                 DELIVERABLES SCHEDULE


DELIVERABLE           FR   UENCY             # OF COPIES   MEDIUM/FORMAT      SUBMIT TO

QAP according to      The contractor will       One        MS Word/Softcopy   COR via email
para 1.6.1            deliver a quality                                                           Commented [VVN NCVVA(1 51: This is listed twice in this
                      assurance plan                                                              table. Please update as it should be identify one time.
                      (QAP) to the COR
                      within 30 days after
                      contract award.
Monthly Status                                  One        MS Word/Softcopy   COR via email
Report (MSR) per      By the 10th of every
para 1.6.1            month.
Quality Assurance     No later than 30          One        MS Word/Softcopy   COR via email
Plan (QAP) per para   days following
1.6.1                 award of contract
Non-Disclosure        Once when in              One        PDF/Softcopy       OUSD(I&S)
Agreement             processing or as                                        Security Officer Commented [INNNCVVA(161: This needs to be added as
(Security) per para   directed.                                               during in processir an attachment to the solicitation. Meaning we should have
1.6.7                                                       Adobe Acrobat     Security Briefing this as a separate document and not embedded with the PWS.
                                                              Document                            Make sure you have a separate document.
Non-Disclosure        Once when in              One        PDF/Softeopy       COR via email
Agreement             processing or as
(Nonpublic            directed.                                                                   Commented PNNNCWA(17]: Please see comment
                                                                                                  abON e.
Information) per                                            Adobe Acrobat
para 1.6.16                                                   Document
Phase out Plan per    Once, NLT 60 days         One        MS Word/Softcopy   COR via email
para 1.6.17           prior to end of
                      contract
Limitation on         The last month of         One        MS Word/Softcopy   COR/CO via email
Subcontracting        the period of
Yearly Reporting      performance of the
(PWS 1.6.17)          base period
Travel Trip Reports   If requested, within      One        MS Word/Softcopy   COR
                      ten (10) working
                      days of travel
                                     TECHNICAL EXHIBIT 3

                                ESTIMATED WORKLOAD DATA

        The data provided below, identifies the labor cate2ories and hours to accomplish the               Formatted: Indent Left: 0.5"
        requirements listed in the PWS for the Labor-Hour CLINs

The estimated hours and labor categories are simply estimates on what it may take to perform the
requirements listed in this PWS based on history on similar projects. The Contractor is not required
to propose the hours listed below and is encouraged to use sound business practices when preparing
the price/cost proposal.                                                                                   Commented IWNNCWA(18]: This language is only used
                                                                                                           for FFP. This is a Labor Hour Contract so the contractor
                                                                                                           must perform to the hours we're giving them. They can't
                                                                                                           propose different hours. I've updated this language and
 PWS       Labor Category                               FTEs        Hours                                  provided it back.
 Item
 5.2       Senior Executive Administrative Support          1                      1872
 5.3       Senior Administrative Operations Manager         1                      1872
 5.4       Senior Operations Specialist/ Contract           1                      1872
           Task Lead
 5.5       Senior Special Security and Special Access       1                      1872
           Security Manager
 5.6       Senior Operations Specialist                     7               13,104 (NTE 18,720)
 5.7       Facilities/IT Manager                            1                       1872
 5.8       Senior Operations Specialist (Optional)      0-(NTE 3)              0-(NTE 5616)                Formatted: Left
 5.8       Operations Specialist (Optional)             0 (NTE 5)              0-(NTE 9360)            •
                                                                                                           Commented 1WNNCWA(19]: I don't understand 0 and
                                                                                                           NTE 3. These are optional CLINs, so we need to identify the
                                                                                                           number of FTEs and the hours. So remove the "0" amount as
                                                                                                           the vendor will propose a labor rate that will be needed.
                                                                                                           Formatted: Left
