OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY INSPECTOR GENERAL

IN RE: DAVID C. GRUSCH

GS-15 Civilian, NGA

Disclosure of Urgent Concern(s)
Complaint of Reprisal


DISCLOSURE OF URGENT CONCERN(S); COMPLAINT OF REPRISAL

1. We come before you to file this disclosure on behalf of David C. Grusch, who is currently a GS-15 employee at the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA). He is a veteran of the United States Air Force (USAF) and has worked directly for or with several IC elements over the course of his lengthy and successful career. He is currently cleared at the TS/SCI level by the NGA and serves as that Agency's Senior Technical Advisor for Unidentified Aerial Phenomena (UAP) analysis. He is also an Intelligence Officer in the USAF Reserves.

2. The Intelligence Community Inspector General ("ICIG") has jurisdiction to receive a report of Urgent Concern when the disclosure involves, among other things, "a false statement to Congress, or a willful withholding from Congress, on an issue of material fact relating to the funding, administration, or operation of an intelligence activity." 50 U.S.C. § 3033(k)(5)(G)(ii). Moreover, jurisdiction exists when "an action, including a personnel action described in section 2302(a)(92)(A) of title 5, United States Code, constituting reprisal or threat of reprisal prohibited under subsection E(3)(B) in response to an employee's reporting an urgent concern…". 50 U.S.C. § 3033(k)(5)(G)(iii).

3. Mr. Grusch previously served as a fully cleared member of the United States (US) Government's UAP Task Force. He has direct knowledge that certain IC elements have purposely and intentionally withheld and/or concealed UAP-related classified information from the US Congress. He has direct knowledge that this classified information has been withheld and/or concealed by the involved IC elements to purposely and intentionally thwart legitimate Congressional oversight of the UAP Program.

4. In July 2021, Mr. Grusch confidentially provided UAP-related classified information to the Department of Defense Inspector General (DoD IG). At that time, Mr. Grusch communicated classified information about the improper withholding and/or concealment of classified material from the US Congress by certain IC elements. Mr. Grusch believes that his identity and the fact of his UAP-related communication(s) with the DoD IG have been disclosed to individuals and/or entities outside the DoD IG, and that he has suffered retaliation and reprisal(s) related thereto.

5. Since his protected disclosure(s) to the DoD IG, Mr. Grusch has been subjected to numerous adverse security clearance actions. These actions have unfairly and unjustifiably impugned his integrity, character, judgment, professionalism, and mental health. While he remains security-cleared by the NGA, his compartmented accesses at numerous other IC elements have been — mysteriously and apparently without plausible explanation — canceled, delayed, denied, and/or improperly obstructed.

6. Mr. Grusch has reason to believe that the many recent issues with his accesses are directly correlated to his previous UAP-related protected communication(s) with the DoD IG.

7. Consistent with 50 U.S.C § 3033(k)(5(D)(ii), Mr. Grusch now wishes to directly communicate the classified specifics of his UAP-related Urgent Concern(s) to the US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) and the US House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI). Accordingly, we hereby request that your office facilitate Mr. Grusch's direct communication with the SSCI and HPSCI.

8. Moreover, having suffered months of retaliation and reprisals because of his prior UAP-related protected communication(s) to the DoD IG, we respectfully request that the ICIG initiate, or cause the initiation of, a whistleblower reprisal investigation pursuant to Presidential Policy Directive-19.

Respectfully submitted,

By: [signature]
Irvin Charles McCullough, III, Esq.
Senior Partner
COMPASS ROSE LEGAL GROUP, PLLC
1250 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Suite 700
Washington, DC 20036

By: [signature]
Andrew P. Bakaj
Managing Partner
COMPASS ROSE LEGAL GROUP, PLLC
1250 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Suite 700
Washington, DC 200236

Attorneys for the Complainant

Dated: May 25, 2022


I have read the disclosure drafted by my attorneys, Irvin Charles McCullough, III, and Andrew P. Bakaj, and I hereby adopt the statements as if they were my own and do solemnly affirm under the penalties of perjury that the contents of the foregoing paper are true and correct to the best of my knowledge.

[signature]
DAVID C. GRUSCH
